---
images: []
order: 2
title: "Preamble \u2013 A Focus on Practice, Not Just Theory"
---

The original/alpha version of the Holochain white paper[1](#page-0-0) took a formal approach to modeling generalized distributed computation schemes and contrasted Holochain's approach with blockchain-based systems. It also provided formal reasoning for the scaling and performance benefits of Holochain's agent-centric approach.

When dealing with distributed systems, however, the application of logical models and formal proofs are often deceiving. This stems from how easy it is to define sets and conditions which are logically solid in theory but fundamentally impossible and unintelligible in practice. Since our primary intent with Holochain is to provide a highly functional and scalable framework for sophisticated decentralized coordination, our focus must be on what is practicable, and resist the pull of the purely conceptual which frequently steers builders into unwieldy architectures.

Note how easy it is to reference a theoretical set like "all living persons" or "all nodes in the network." But in reality, it is impossible to identify that set in the physical world. Even if one could eliminate the fuzzy boundaries in the meaning of "persons" or "living," there is no way to discover and record the information quickly enough about who is dying, being resuscitated, and being born to construct the actual data set. Likewise, no single agent on a network can determine with certainty which nodes have come online, gone offline, or have declared themselves as new nodes. Also, since network partitions are a real, at any moment, one must question which partition is considered "the network," and how to enable a single node or group of nodes to continue operating appropriately even when no longer connected to the main network.

The initial example should be a comparatively easy data set to work with, since it changes relatively slowly. Typically each person undergoes a state change only twice in their life (when they become a living person, and when they cease to be one). However, the real-world use-cases that modern distributed tooling needs to handle involve data sets with much more rapid and complex changes. A more apt logical construct might be "all people with just one foot on the ground". Membership in this set changes quite rapidly – around 1/2 billion times per second[2](#page-0-1) .

It should be obvious there is no practical way to work with that data set without requiring actions that either break reality (like freezing time) or asserting a god-like, omniscient being, who not only has instantaneous access to all knowledge (requiring information propagation faster than the speed of light), but also has infinite attention to all states (likely requiring infinite energy). However, since current computing architectures are bound by laws of physics, we should avoid the temptation of injecting such impossible constructs into our theoretical models. A proof that involves simple logical concepts which cannot be reliably worked with in practice is not much of a proof at all.

"Global state" and strategies for consensus about it are exactly one of these dodgy constructs which are easy concepts, but involve a drastic reduction of complexity, agency, and degrees of freedom to reflect a small subset of events happening in physical reality. Yet most current distributed systems undertake the expensive task of having each node construct and maintain this unwieldy global fiction. So, for example, although many blockchains run on tens of thousands of processors, they advance in lockstep as if a single-threaded process, and they are only reliable for very simple world models, like moving tokens (subtracting from a number in one address and adding it to the number in another address).

"State" within the local computing context is likely rooted in the concept of the Turing Tape[3](#page-0-2) or Von Neumann lin-

<span id="page-0-0"></span><sup>1</sup> [https://holochain.org/documents/holochain-white-paper-al](https://holochain.org/documents/holochain-white-paper-alpha.pdf)[pha.pdf](https://holochain.org/documents/holochain-white-paper-alpha.pdf)

<span id="page-0-1"></span><sup>2</sup> *Globally, The Average Person Walks About 5,000 Steps Per Day*, American Institute of Cancer Research, 2017 [https://www.aicr.org/news/globally-the-average-person-walks](https://www.aicr.org/news/globally-the-average-person-walks-about-5000-steps-per-day/)[about-5000-steps-per-day/.](https://www.aicr.org/news/globally-the-average-person-walks-about-5000-steps-per-day/)

<span id="page-0-2"></span><sup>3</sup> See [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing\\_machine.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_machine)

ear memory address architecture[4](#page-1-0) which assume a single tape head or system bus for making changes to the single local memory space where changes are stored. With the introduction of multi-core processors, programmers encountered the myriad problems of having multiple agents (CPUs) operating on just one shared local state. They developed various strategies to enforce memory safety for concurrent local operations. So, in distributed computing, people extrapolated these local strategies and starting inventing some new ones, **still in the attempt to manage one single state across many physical machines.** The assumption of the need to sustain this simple logical concept of managing one global state persisted, even when that concept was mapped onto a physical topology which made it fundamentally unknowable in practice.

Early influential works in decentralized computing (such as the Byzantine Generals Problem[5](#page-1-1) ) may have also set such expectations. Those papers were written in the context of reaching consensus in finite control systems where there was a known number of sensors and states, and the goal was to reach a unified decision (like nine generals deciding a time for all to attack). Therefore, to be Byzantine Fault Tolerant, seems simply that a system is tolerant of the kinds of faults introduced by the generals problem (messages that are corrupted, misordered, or lost and generals/nodes that are malicious), but most distributed systems have assumed that global consensus must be constructed and maintained in order to reach a unified outcome. In this paper, we will detail some more efficient paths to enable agents to act without a construct of global consensus at all, yet still have strong guarantees that even when nodes act in partitioned groups or individually, they will reach a unified outcome.

So, while the formalizations from the original Holochain white paper are still valid in theory, this white paper is more concerned with addressing what works in practice. We will start by stating our underlying assumptions as axioms – each of which correlates to architectural properties of Holochain. And we will take special care not to make grand, categorical statements which cannot be implemented inside the constraints of computational systems bounded by the laws of physics.
