---
images: []
order: 13
title: VII Technology and the Future
---

Technologies are undergoing constant changes, and they influence all sides of human life. In order to assess new developments in technology it is necessary to discuss the expectations for the future with respect to human prosperity and possible risks involved therein. This part of the *Companion* discusses the extent to which new technologies contribute to the realization of a desirable future or whether it will be harmful or risky. Some steps have already been taken. The political decision-makers in the EU have drawn up "the Lisbon strategy for economic, social and environmental renewal." Here a colossal emphasis has been put on the development of environmentally friendly technologies – cleaner technologies – that can make use of alternative energy sources like hydrogen. Another important area is nanotechnology, with both military and civilian applications.

Philosophers, and other scholars working with issues related to technology, often define technology differently. We come from different cultures and therefore emphasize certain things differently. All existing definitions of "technology" rest upon specific schools of thought. However, for "technology" there cannot be any simple definition pledging allegiance to one or other school. There are "metaphysical" complications that have to be overcome. The structure of the *Companion* will guarantee this diversity. Definitions are always related to the values of a tradition, of a specific group of thinkers, to a school of thought, and of course to whoever provides the definition. The problem is that "technology" is not one "thing" but a complex of practices, methods, hopes, intentions, goals, needs and desires, besides all the actual technologies in hand. The lack of unity is in turn due to the interdisciplinary nature of technology and technology studies. A single definition simply cannot fathom the complexity of technology in its entirety. In sum, a thorough definition of "technology" needs a "companion" – *A Companion to the Philosophy of Technology*.

Putting this companion together would not have been possible if it was not for all the authors and pillar editors who vividly, eruditely and with great expertise advised and contributed on the way. We should like to extend our gratitude to all our contributors, thank Rasmus Rendsvig for taking care of the logistics in the assembly part of the process, and finally thank Blackwell Publishing and in particular Nick Bellorini and Liz Cremona for taking on this project.
