---
images: []
order: 19
title: Preamble
---

Owing to anthropological diversity, the attempt to define technology seems quite challenging. People may have different interpretations as they are positioned differently. This reminds me of the Chinese parable of the blind men and the elephant.

Megantz (2002) further elaborates in the preface to his book *Technology Management: Developing and Implementing Effective Licensing Programs* that technology is a wonderful, amazing, always changing bag of tricks that helps human beings to live healthier, happier (however, these could take place in other way around) and more fulfilling lives. To a scientist, technology is the end product of one's research. To an engineer, technology is a tool or process that can be employed to build better products or solve technical problems. To an attorney, technology is intellectual property to be protected and guarded. To a business executive, technology may be the most important, yet least understood, company asset. Technology is viewed as competitive advantage against rivals.

Technology means state power to both developing and developed countries. Technology is regarded as a strategic instrument in achieving economic targets and in the creation of wealth and prosperity in the developing countries, while technology is taken as an important vehicle to get large profits in the developed countries. The effective use of technology is perhaps the most important issue faced by both developing and developed countries, and will undoubtedly become even more critical in years to come.

The word "technology" usually conjures up many different images and generally refers to what has been described as the "high-tech," or high-technology, industries. It has to be understood that limiting technology to high-tech industries such as computers, superconductivity, chips, genetic engineering, robotics, magnetic railways and so on focuses excessive attention on what the media consider newsworthy (Gaynor 1996). However, limiting technology to science, engineering and mathematics also loses sight of other supporting technologies. Actually, technology includes more than machines, processes and inventions. Traditionally, it might concentrate more on hardware; however, in these days, more on soft side as well. There are many manifestations of technology; some are very simple, while others are very complex.

### What Is Technology?

But what exactly is meant by the term "technology"? According to Dean and LeMaster (1995, p. 19), technology is defined as "firm-specific information concerning characteristics and performance properties of production processes and product design." While Contractor and Sagafi-Nejad (1981) describe technology simply as "a bundle of information, rights and services," Maskus (2004, p. 9) defines technology as "the information necessary to achieve a certain production outcome from a particular mean of combining or processing selected inputs." However, Maskus (2004) solely distinguishes between embodied and disembodied technology, whereas Kedia and Bhagat (1988) recommend a more detailed classification into process-, product- and person-embodied technology.

Technology represents the combination of human understanding of natural laws and phenomena accumulated since ancient times to make things that fulfill our needs and desires or that perform certain functions (Karatsu 1990). In other words, technology has to create things that benefit human beings. Miles (1995) defines technology as the means by which we apply our understanding of the natural world to the solution of practical problems. It is a combination of "hardware" (buildings, plant and equipment) and "software" (skills, knowledge, experience, together with suitable organizational and institutional arrangement).

The UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) has provided the following definition:

Technology is bought and sold as capital goods including machinery and productive systems, human labour usually skilled manpower, management and specialised scientists. Information of both technical and commercial character, including that which is readily available, and that subject to proprietary rights and restrictions.

However, according to this thesis, technology cannot merely be considered as a production factor, and it is not socially neutral (Mnaas 1990). It seems much easier for understanding "technology" to consider the concept of "technology" as consisting of four closely interlinked elements: namely, technique, knowledge (normally being considered as "technology"), the organization of the production, and the product. However, knowledge does not make sense if the organization of the relevant production goes without producing meaningful product. Therefore, technology must be applied, testified and maintained, which implies a demand for a further input of a suitable range of human resources and skills. However, it should be noticed that it is this latter input that is at the root of the difficulty in transferring technologies between different environments. Nevertheless the modern view emphasizes the coherence of technology and knowledge, and points out that technology transfer is not achievable without knowledge transfer as knowledge is a key to controlling technology as a whole (Li-Hua 2004); some even use "technology" interchangeably with "know-how." Knowledge is closely related to technology since the pure disposal of technology is not sufficient for a successful implementation. In the majority of the cases, especially in complex technology, knowledge, in particular tacit knowledge, is required for a successful international technology transfer.

Technique covers the instruments of labor (machinery and tools), materials and the way they are brought into function by labor in the working process. Both social dynamic (working process) and social contradictions (e.g. between machinery and labor) are inherent in this element of the technology as in each of the subconcepts.

Knowledge consists of three principal categories: applied science, skills and intuition. The weighting between these categories of knowledge is changing historically, but in every case an adequate combination of types of knowledge must be present. *Knowledge is the "key to control" over technology as a whole*, which can be seen both at micro-level (Taylorism) and at higher levels of social aggregation (technological dependency) (Mnaas 1990). However, it is helpful for understanding that knowledge has recently been classified as explicit knowledge and tacit knowledge.

Technique and knowledge must be organized before they can bring about effective results. Organization is therefore an integral part of technology. Organization of a working process of technique and knowledge into a product may have technical causes, but mostly the actual choice of organization will rest widely on social-economic causes and reflect the general social structure of society.

Product. The ultimate purpose of bringing technique, knowledge and organization together is of course to obtain a product. Without including this goal, it is in fact difficult to understand the other three elements properly. It seems natural to include the product in a comprehensive technology concept, not least because in practice the choice of product often precedes the choice of the technique, knowledge and organization by which it is going to be produced.

Rosenberg and Frischtak (1985) pointed out that the specificity of technology has close links with the nature of the inputs to its production and of the resulting outputs. In most advanced countries, at least 60 percent of research and development expenditures are on development, namely expenditure to develop specific products or production processes. It is important to have this dissecting of technology and to have a distinction between technology and knowledge. Knowledge is a fluid mix of framed experience, values, contextual information and expert insight that provides a framework for evaluating and incorporating new experiences and information. It consists of truth, beliefs, perspectives, concepts, judgments, expectation, methodologies, know-how; and exists in different forms such as tacit, explicit, symbolic, embodied, en-brained and en-cultured knowledge.
