---
images: []
order: 22
title: KELD NIELSON
---

By Western technology is here understood a large set of particular technologies and technological practices which mainly have their roots in inventions and developments in Europe and North America. In particular, since the Second World War, most of these technological practices have spread, so that "Western" technology can now be found on all continents.

Technology has been an integral part of the development of modern Western civilization and the way Western modes of behavior and production have reached all parts of the Earth. Western technologies have been at the heart of the change from a rural-agricultural economy to an urban-industrial one that many countries or regions have undergone during the past 200 years.

It is not possible to distinguish clearly between features of technology and technological practices which are clearly "Western" and those which have been developed in non-Western cultures. Some of the characteristics of Western technology outlined below are common to technologies of many different cultures – including cultures which are now extinct – while some are particular to Western technology and make it stand out as remarkable among the accomplishments of mankind.

In fact, some of the characteristics of technology which are often thought of as unique to Western technology are general features found in the technology of other cultures, too. Examples of such features are: the ability of technology to change the conditions of life by providing better or easier acquisition of food, more safety and better living conditions; the importance of sources of energy, of transport, of storage and of other arrangements of infrastructure, and the close connection between the wealth of a society and its use of suitable technologies; the application of technology by the powerful to maintain their wealth and position including large-scale technological initiatives by rulers or governments; the symbolic use of technology in the demonstration of power and control or of religious authority; the competition and often co-existence of different types or technology; and the use of technology in defense, attack and conquest. Even the close interaction between the technological, the social and the cultural spheres, which is so apparent in modern Western society, appears to be a distinct feature of technology in other cultures and societies, too.

But other characteristics seem to be unique to a recent and "Western" development. Among the most striking features particular to Western technology are: the ability to extract mechanical energy from fossil fuel through inventions like the steam engine and the internal combustion engine; mass production through the integration of the extraction of raw materials with transport systems, production facilities and sophisticated systems of distribution of wares to masses of consumers; the widespread use of technological standards and unified measuring systems; a permanent increase in mechanical precision in tool-making and manufacture; an intimate and active relation to capital and investments; the use of scientific knowledge in the development of products and production methods; and the high priority given to renewal through investments in research and development. A specifically "Western" result of the widespread use of technology is also the capacity to disturb Earth's climate and eco-systems on a global scale, and the power to eradicate most – if not all – of mankind through the use of nuclear or biological weapons.

It is an open question at what time in history the development of technology in the West became unique relative to technological scenarios in contemporary cultures. The Middle Ages (sixth to fourteenth centuries) are often identified as the period during which we find the cultural, economic and political origins of what later became modern Western society. But technologically important developments during the Middle Ages like the far-reaching improvement of agricultural techniques brought about by the use of the new heavy plow, an intensified use of water power, or the building of ever larger cathedrals are differences in quantity rather than in essence in comparison with other great technological cultures. Other significant medieval technological innovations like the spinning wheel, paper, Arabic numerals, the compass, guns and gunpowder were imported into medieval Europe from outside. Outstanding local inventions were the horse collar (ninth century), spectacles (thirteenth century) and the weight-driven mechanical clock (thirteenth century). Seen in hindsight, the most important development with regard to the technology of the West was the growth of a large number of autonomous or semi-autonomous cities catering to trade and handicraft production. Here skilled trade developed with novelties like guilds, master craftsmen, journeymen and apprentices. Also, new modes of production involving many steps and division of labor were perfected, for example in the wool and dying industries. Banking systems emerged, making it easier to direct the flow of money toward trade, building and production, and the rising trading companies started to use double-entry bookkeeping.

The Renaissance (roughly fifteenth to seventeenth centuries), however, saw novelties which, also in a global perspective, were remarkable. One was Johannes Gutenberg's development around 1450 of printing with movable type. A somewhat similar technique had much earlier been used in Korea but apparently without the significant impact on cultural and technical development that can be traced in Europe. Highly important for the advance of technology was the subsequent use of printed books to spread technical knowledge. During the sixteenth century a new genre of books appeared that gave detailed information about machines and technological processes, often accompanied by diagrams and other illustrations. This made it possible to accumulate and disseminate knowledge about specific technological details and created a hitherto unknown knowledge base for the work of engineers and other technologists. It also made it possible to collect, preserve and disseminate geographical knowledge and other knowledge about nature in a systematic and cumulative manner, thus paving the way for the boom in knowledge and investigative methods known as the scientific revolution.

Another globally significant occurrence was the European expansion across the oceans, led by Portuguese and Spanish traders and sailors, and soon followed by the Dutch and the English. On the technical side, this was made possible by the development of the full-rigged ship, armed with guns, and the design of new astronomical methods of navigation through the work of Portuguese astronomers. This marks a very early example of the extraordinary ability of Western technology to embody scientific knowledge and to spread across the globe.

Also the granting of privileges to use certain inventions or techniques in manufacture or building, which later grew into the practice of issuing patents to protect the owners of technological novelties, began in the fifteenth century.

During the Renaissance many technological improvements appeared gradually in mining techniques, in the extraction and processing of metals, in the design and use of firearms, in fortification, in the design and use of ships, and in the construction of harbors, canals and bridges. Many developments were tied to the military growth of the ever stronger national states which during the seventeenth century invested in enormous standing armies. Other developments accompanied the rapidly growing international commerce which toward the end of the century found a new hub in the Netherlands. The Dutch Republic became the center of a worldwide trading and processing network based on improvements in shipping and innovations like commodity exchanges and a stock exchange.

During the eighteenth century craftsmen like Thomas Newcomen and James Watt invented and improved the steam engine, which made it possible to convert accumulated solar energy in the form of wood, coal or oil to mechanical motion. A later development led to steam turbines, internal combustion engines and jet engines that have the same function. Before the appearance of such heat-engines, the chief energy source had been the muscle power of men or animals, expensive because they must be fed, putting a strain on food supply. Also the natural energy sources – water or wind – were for all practical purposes limited. Water power was tied to specific locations and could not be geographically distributed in large amounts. Wind power extracted through windmills was uneven in output and highly capital-consuming. With the new engines and plenty of cheap fossil fuel, Western technology broke this otherwise universal constraint on the magnitude of technological activities. During the nineteenth century the heat-engines were at the heart of momentous technological developments. Production in factories or other plants, combined with railway transport and oceangoing steamships, made possible the rise of the US and some European countries as industrialized powers of production on a world scale.

These changes had certain unique Western technological features. Many of the new machines, including the steam engines, were self-acting in the sense that built-in control mechanisms, like James Watt's feedback regulator, managed their operation by turning valves, lifting levers or releasing triggers. During the first half of the nineteenth century a number of machines were developed which, like the mechanical loom, through self-regulation could perform operations previously only mastered by skilled labor. Significantly, the machines could be supervised by unskilled workmen, cheaper to employ and easier to control in the changed production environments.

The manufacture of the new machines was made possible through improvements of "machines for making machines" like drilling machines, lathes, milling machines and more precise measurement instruments. Suggestions of a common standard for screw threads like the one proposed by Joseph Whitworth in 1841 was also part of a move toward more precision and more uniformity. A need for more systematic technological knowledge was met in Europe and the US by the establishment of specific vocational schools and engineering colleges in large numbers.

By the middle of the century a third, but related, strand of development led to a system, first in rifle production, by which one part of a mechanical device could be manufactured with such precision that without individual fitting it could be replaced by a similar part from another similar mechanical device. Before this, every part – even the screws – of mechanical devices were produced and fitted together individually and could not without further filing or grinding fit into another similar device. The new system became known as "the American system of Manufacture." In the 1860s it was introduced in the manufacture of Singer sewing machines and McCormick farming machinery, and high precision and interchangeability are now essential to all modern forms of mass production. A further significant step in the same direction was the introduction of assembly-line production by the Ford automobile works in 1914. A third step was the introduction of robots in production plants from the late 1970s. The Japanese perfection of car production during the 1950s and onwards, now referred to as "lean manufacture," is emblematic of this motion toward rational and systematic optimization. But lean manufacture is also a reminder that the development of "Western" technology is no longer confined to the West.

A recurring theme in the scientific and technological debate of the Enlightenment was the vision of making science useful through the application of scientific results in the development of new technology. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries many individual scientists were employed as advisers or troubleshooters in technical projects, but a systematic and effective way of involving science was not found. The nowadays very strong interaction between science and technology found its first efficient working mode in the chemical industry of the nineteenth century. From 1855 onwards, university-trained chemists discovered ways to produce dyes synthetically for textiles – in the beginning accidentally, later systematically. Such dyes had been produced on an organic basis for centuries, but now a growing range of colors could be manufactured in chemical factories at greatly reduced prices. A race among the chemical producers set in, and soon German companies led the way. During the second half of the century they kept their lead by employing university-trained chemists in growing numbers and letting them work in rooms that were fitted out like university laboratories; the industrial research and development laboratory had been invented. A very large part of the technological breakthroughs of the last hundred years have their origin in the now numerous research and development laboratories. Some are funded directly by government agencies, others by the large companies themselves, whether dealing in electronics, drugs, weapons, or any other kind of advanced technology.

Toward the end of the nineteenth century the advent of "modernity" coincided with the appearance of new amazing technologies like the telephone, electrical energy distribution, radio, cars, fast turbine-driven ships, and aeroplanes. At the hospitals, novel science-based medical technologies like X-rays, electrocardiographs and new drugs were introduced, together with new concepts about the bacteriological or viral origin of many diseases. Science, technology and progress seemed to be true companions. But during the First World War advanced technology clearly demonstrated its dark side through the devastating use of poisonous gas, machine guns, improved artillery, submarines, radio telephones, and aeroplanes. During the Second World War all parties used scientists on a massive scale to invent and improve weapons and defensive measures; nuclear bombs, jet fighters, ballistic rockets, radar, sulphur drugs and penicillin being among the most famous. The success of science-like research to develop and perfect new technologies for military purposes set the stage for the massive technological research and development in the US after the Second World War, leading to such – military and civilian – devices as solid state electronics, CNC (computerized numerical control) machines, the digital computer, the Internet and nuclear energy. Technological development projects funded by various American defense budgets have had a tremendous influence on the way Western technology has developed during the past fifty years.

At the beginning of the third millennium, people in close contact with Western technology live their lives surrounded by, and in dependence on, a number of large technological systems. In cities, systems of drinking water, sewage, gas supply, transport, and electricity supply exist side by side with information systems like telephone, radio, television and the Internet. Less conspicuous, but not less important, are other systems that keep track of the weather, monitor pollution, oversee bank transactions and the use of credit cards, convey information about currency and stock exchanges, monitor air traffic and survey the airspace, and so on. The systems interact, mainly because they depend on electricity as their ultimate energy source, and because they depend on connected computers for monitoring and regulation. At the same time, international air traffic spans the globe, cars move people and goods around on enormous road systems, and ships sail the oceans transporting raw materials and finished goods from producer to market in ever increasing amounts.

The most characteristic traits of modern technology seem to be its scale, its pervasiveness, its complexity, and its ability to change constantly. The modern Western style of living, health and welfare would be unthinkable without Western technology. But Western technology also has severe downsides. Previously, its pervasiveness and capability to span the globe created the background for a comprehensive and ruinous slave trade. Later, Western imperialism was much assisted by telegraphs, steam ships, efficient rifles, and railways. It made economic and human exploitation possible and gave rise to a disagreeable feeling of Western cultural supremacy. And, although war is not a recent activity inspired by, or made possible by, Western technology, modern "total" war, in which civilians often suffer more than the combatants, is.

One great challenge created by the now globally distributed Western technology is the enormous economic disparities between the various parts of the globe, most of which now share the same information systems and have access to the same information, but not at all to the same wealth and standards of living. Another daunting challenge is the threatening climatic changes brought about principally by the intensive use of fossil fuels to power transport and production.
