---
images: []
order: 25
title: FRANCESCA BRAY
---

In this brief essay I address two issues: how concepts of technology in its modern sense have affected the experience of being Chinese and how technological practices and meanings in China might inflect our own ways of thinking about technology.

In the *Novum organum* of 1620, Francis Bacon noted that "Printing, gunpowder and the compass have changed the whole face and state of things throughout the world . . . in so much that no empire, no sect, no star seems to have exerted greater power and influence in human affairs than these mechanical discoveries" (1.129). Karl Marx, in his *Economic Notebooks* of 1861–3, put it slightly differently: they were "the three great inventions which ushered in bourgeois society. Gunpowder blew up the knightly class, the compass discovered the world market and founded the colonies, and the printing press was the instrument of Protestantism and the regeneration of science" (Marx 1861). In his encylopedic research on science and technology in pre-modern China, Joseph Needham documented the Chinese origins of all these technologies but was then faced with the challenge of explaining why they failed to transform Chinese society as they had revolutionized the West. Until recently both Chinese and Western ideas about technology in China were routinely framed in terms of the so-called "Needham question": Given that China surpassed Europe in many technical domains until well into the medieval period, why did imperial Chinese civilization not generate its own scientific or industrial revolution? Why did it achieve so much in early times, then lose its virile drive to innovate and sink into vulnerable stagnation?

Throughout the colonial period and through to the present day, perceptions of technological superiority have played a key role in constructing ideologies of Western dominance, and in shaping national self-images (Adas 1989). The Chinese first had their noses rubbed in the technical ineptitude of their civilization during the first Opium War of 1840–2, when their defenses were pulverized by British warships. This was the first of many humiliating defeats by well-armed Western powers; the Qing government was forced at gunpoint to cede treaty-ports and land, grant access to missionaries, and open its markets to Western industrial commodities. From 1860 the government adopted an innovative but shaky policy of "self-strengthening," hoping to restore Chinese wealth and power through the selective adoption of Western legal and administrative institutions and the development of strategic technologies. Foreign experts were brought in to educate and train Chinese engineers, to construct plant, and to design and manage

projects for building railways, telegraph lines and, above all, armaments. The Jiangnan Arsenal, founded in Shanghai in 1865 to produce firearms, artillery and warships, was the most famous of these ventures. Despite some signal achievements, by 1894 China was still too poorly armed and organized to withstand a whirlwind invasion by the Japanese (Waley-Cohen 1999). As they signed away Taiwan and the northeastern provinces in the Treaty of Shimonoseki, the Chinese asked themselves why they had failed to modernize when the Japanese, another supposedly inferior Oriental nation, had succeeded so spectacularly. Whereas the self-strengthening movement had proposed an accommodation between "Western artifacts and Chinese spirit," reformers and revolutionaries now felt that Chinese traditions were incompatible with modernity and must be ruthlessly discarded.

Through the last years of empire and the troubled decades of the Republic (1911–49), many Chinese took a technocratic view of the future. Science, technology and technical expertise could – and must – be imported as catalysts for modernization. However, China was believed to lack any indigenous intellectual or material traditions to aid this essential process. Needham's work played a fundamental role in challenging this assumption. Although it is not a tactic that appeals particularly to historians of technology today, Needham's long list of key Chinese technical inventions (e.g. the crossbow trigger and the blast furnace) which predated their appearance in the West effectively challenged the view that China had historically lacked "real" technological skills or understanding.

Needham's findings began to appear in print in the early 1950s. The communist government of the People's Republic of China, established in 1949, warmly welcomed Needham's documentation of what they identified as the skills and ingenuity of the working masses of ancient China (also manifest in the stunning artifacts excavated by archeologists during the 1960s and 1970s). Denied any aid by the anti-communist Western powers, at first the new regime relied upon the Soviet Union to follow a conventional technocratic path of development. But after the Sino-Soviet split of the late 1950s Mao's regime was thrown on to its own resources, consisting principally of an enormous labor pool. The state envisioned a "self-reliant" future built with technology that the Chinese workers and peasants would create for themselves, applying native technical skills (and the indigenous inventive traditions so opportunely demonstrated by Needham) to adapt Western models, thus creating infrastructure and machines suited to Chinese material and political needs and conditions. The destructive excesses of the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution are undeniable; however, the village and shop-floor technical projects of the period did mobilize popular participation in technical problem-solving, and mass mobilization built basic infrastructure (Sigurdson 1980; Wagner 1997). Such resources underpinned the return to a technocratic model that swiftly followed Mao's death: the Four Modernizations (Agriculture; Industry; Science and Technology; National Defense) and the economic reforms launched in 1978 (Volti 1982; Simon and Goldman 1989).

One slogan of the Cultural Revolution was "Better Red than Expert" – technological knowledge was only considered valuable if it was locally grounded and served the people. Since 1978 official policy has married technocratic and entrepreneurial values, sustaining three decades of steady economic growth and expansion of education and R&D. Technology, some advanced, some less so, has been imported under state auspices,

and joint-venture companies – over 216,000 in 1997 (Volti 2002: 11) – have been established to develop expertise. Technology transfer has not always proceeded smoothly, especially where the hand of the state has weighed heavily, but in the last few years greater freedom for joint ventures, more openness to foreign participation, closer links to Hong Kong, Taiwan and diaspora Chinese as effective conduits of expertise and inputs, as well as new approaches to developing internal and international collaborations between state, universities and corporations seem to have paid rich dividends. Although Westerners still prefer to think of the Chinese as copying rather than innovating, China is rapidly emerging as a global leader in several branches of technoscience, including biotechnology and nanotechnology.

In 1930s China, the term "technology" denoted a material manifestation of Western superiority which China needed but could not create for itself. During the self-reliance campaigns of the 1960s, the term carried material, political and ethical connotations that would have been quite alien to most Americans of the period, if perhaps dimly recognizable to Scandinavians. Today basic misunderstandings between a Chinese and an American over what the term "technology" signifies would be unlikely, but there has been one big change: the Chinese post-colonial malaise is cured. Now most young Chinese believe, perhaps even more confidently than Americans, that their nation will play a central role in building the future.

An intriguing parallel to this resurgence of national technological confidence can be observed in the domain of technology studies. Until recently, the Chinese historical experience was usually considered interesting as a case of failure – in the terms of Bertrand Gille, a "blocked system." Marx saw China as a once great civilization which intrinsically lacked historical dynamism. Needham argued that a rich Chinese tradition of scientific and technical dynamism culminated in the Song dynasty (960–1279) but faltered after 1400. He tended to attribute this to the Confucian preference for order and stability typical of late-imperial bureaucrats (Needham 1967). Chinese Marxist historians also blamed imperial institutions and a feudal mode of production for smothering what they called sprouts of capitalism, elements of technical and economic dynamism during the late empire which might otherwise have triggered radical change. Other Western scholars, inspired by Mark Elvin's highly influential concept of involution (Elvin 1973), have sought sociotechnical, demographic or institutional explanations for China's failure to follow the path of Europe. From this perspective, China's history is less valuable in its own terms than as the West's Other. More recently, however, critical historians have turned the tables (Sivin 1982). Instead of trying to explain a supposed failure (to follow the trajectory of the West), they ask what China was at any particular historical moment in its own terms. They then are led to ask in a more anthropological vein which technological domains were of particular significance in that historical context, and what kinds of work, social or symbolic as well as material and economic, they performed. This is proving an exciting and revealing exercise. Examples include: the relation between the design of bells, kingship and cosmology (Falkenhausen 1994); technical changes that supported the emergence of new cultural elites (Kuhn 1987); how technologies were deployed to mark and maintain gender difference in times of social change (Bray 1997); evolving traditions of mass-production – from the ritual bronzes of the ancient Shang to the export-porcelains of the eighteenth century – and their shifting impact upon aesthetics and governance (Ledderose 2000); and philosophies

of human material action (Schäfer 2005). Just as the feminist critique has transformed technology studies and undermined its master narratives, so, too, critical studies of technology in non-Western societies, of which China offers a particularly rich span, promise stimulating new perspectives on the nature and meaning of technology.
