---
images: []
order: 29
title: '"Indian Agriculture"'
---

In the same period, the Indian so-called style of agriculture ( *filaha hindiyya*) diffused from India westward. This movement included a distinctive roster of monsoon crops – rice, sugar cane, Old World cotton, watermelon, and citrus of all kinds, to which the artichoke and eggplant were added in Persia – that could only be grown under irrigation in the Mediterranean basin where the growing season was plagued by drought. Therefore, along with the crops came techniques required to irrigate them, most of which were seemingly of Persian origin: the qanat (filtration gallery) and the noria, generically called the Persian Wheel, although it is improbable that it was invented there. Both techniques had begun their diffusion before the Arab conquests: the Romans knew about qanats and built galleries all over North Africa. The Arabs vastly intensified

the use of the technique: eastern Spain is emblematic by virtue of a profusion of very small qanats, some as short as 3 meters – backyard irrigation systems that any peasant could build.

There are two types of noria (from Arabic *na'ura*, "to groan"). The first is the current wheel that lifts water from rivers or irrigation canals by the force of the water alone. They were large in size and required no gearing. It is the first known self-acting machine. The second is the short-shafted, geared wheel, moved by animal power. In design it is an inverted Vitruvian wheel, which converts the horizontal motion of a wheel rotated by an ox, a camel or a donkey to vertical by engaging the gears on a potgarland wheel on which an endless chain of pots fell and rose, dumping water into a canal or a holding-tank. The device was used in littoral marshlands of the Mediterranean to drain waterlogged land for agriculture; in drier areas it was the basis of small irrigation systems. The noria made it possible for a single household to produce surplus for the market.

The Indian style of agriculture, codified in agronomical treatises such as Ibn al-Wahshiyya's *Kitab al-filaha al-Nabatiyya* (*Nabatean Agriculture*) and the works of the Andalusí agronomical school (Ibn Bassal, Ibn al-'Awwam, Ibn al-Wafid, etc.), was a compilation of peasant lore overlaid with the Greek notion of four counterbalancing qualities (hot, cold, moist, dry). Soils were watered, or dressed with fertilizer or marl, in order to balance the qualities. The result was a finely tuned agricultural system that took advantage of microregional differences in soil and water.

Norms that regulated the distribution of water and the administration of irrigation can also be considered as technologies. In this sense, institutional details such as the specific order of irrigation (from the beginning of a canal to the end, or vice versa) are part of the same technological package as the material elements of an irrigation system: the tapping of water via qanats or diversion dams, as well as the means of transport (canals), storage (tanks and reservoirs) and division (by divisors of given proportions) of water. Not only the norms governing allocation (water rights), but also practical hydraulic know-how (surveying canal routes, leveling canals, and construction of galleries and canals) and horticultural know-how (understanding the water requirements of different crops), are *techniques*, in that they are mechanisms of resource utilization in the same manner as physical structures.

Vertical (Vitruvian) and horizontal watermills – simpler, ungeared structures, where current-driven water-paddles are attached directly to the movable or "runner" millstone above – had appeared virtually simultaneously in the Mediterranean basin, the Middle East and China some time between 100 bc and ad 100. Both were known in the Islamic world, along with a distinctive third type, generically known as *aruba* mills. These are of the horizontal variety, but the water is delivered under pressure from a cylindrical water-tower. This is a way of milling in semi-arid conditions with a scant water supply.

The migration of artisans was the primary conduit for transmission of these ideas: Chinese prisoners were said to have brought paper technology to Bukhara. Persian lusterware potters migrated to Málaga in the later thirteenth century, fleeing the Mongols. Lusterware required updraft kilns, which were introduced concomitantly. The Persian loom, with enough heddles to reproduce the complex patterns characteristic of Persian textiles, likewise arrived in al-Andalus with Persian migrants. Migrants are

typically risk-takers and thus less wedded to the traditional practices of the different crafts.
