---
images: []
order: 30
title: Practical Astronomy, Surveying and Time-keeping
---

Medieval Muslims developed an approach to astronomy that was based on Greek astronomical theory (especially Ptolemy's *Almagest*), Indian astronomical tables, and the astrolabe, an observational tool that performed a variety of tasks including finding the time of the day or year or of a celestial event, or determining latitude. Finding the *qibla* (the direction of Mecca) astronomically gave rise to a specific body of tables. An astrolabe, or a simplified version of one, could be used in navigation to determine the altitudes of the sun, the moon, the pole star or other celestial bodies. Arab ship captains, however, preferred a simpler instrument, a wooden block and knotted string called the *kamal*, which was used to take celestial altitudes.

In the medieval Islamic world there was a well-defined science of astronomical time-keeping called *'ilm al-miqat*. It was used, first, to determine the five daily canonical hours of prayer. A muezzin could do this with an astrolabe, or a professional astronomer called a *muwaqqit* could be hired. At the popular level, the hours of night could be determined by anybody who knew some astrology by looking at the lunar mansions; in daytime, by measuring the length of one's own shadow – and there were twenty or more methods of how to do this. At the learned level, scholars like al-Khwarizmi wrote prayer-tables for each latitude. Muezzins were enjoined to use astronomical tables for determining prayer times and the astrolabe for finding the *qibla* (the direction of Mecca).

The rules of surveying area fell under the broad science of measurement called *'ilm al-misaha*, and that of leveling fields and irrigation canals part of *'ilm al-mizan* ("the science of the balance"). In order to ascertain the gradient of the route of an irrigation canal, various kinds of level were used. These were described in treatises devoted to *'ilm al-mizan* ("the science of the balance"). On large-scale, government-directed canal projects, as in the Tigris and Euphrates basin, labor costs were figured by calculating the volume of the canal algebraically.

Leveling instruments ranged from the very simple, like a plate or pipe filled with water or a large A-level with plumb bob, to sophisticated instruments like the astrolabe and the quadrant, and geometry. Builders measured the perpendicular with similarly simple or difficult methods, ranging from a plumb bob, a plumb bob and quadrant, or a gnomon.

### Gunpowder and Firearms

Gunpowder was a serendipitous invention of Chinese alchemists while experimenting with mixtures of sulfur and saltpeter in an attempt to make gold. The oldest surviving recipe dates from ad 800, and by the thirteenth century they had developed fragmentation bombs and kinds of explosive projectiles. The Mongols transmitted the technology westward, and gunpowder recipes appear in Hasan al-Rammah's *Kitab al furusiya wa'l-munasb* *al-harbiya* (*Treatise on Horsemanship and Stratagems of War*), written in 1280. Muslims introduced artillery into Nasrid Granada, where "iron pellets that were shot with fire" were used in an attack on Elche. In the seventeenth century, Muslim exiles from Spain (then called Moriscos) introduced advanced weapons technology into Ottoman North Africa, where Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Ghanim al-Andalusi wrote an influential artillery manual based broadly on Luis Collado's *Plática Manual de artillería* (1592): *Kitab al-izz wa'l-manafi lil-mujahidin fi sabil illa b'il-madafi* (*The book in which one seeks triumph and advantage when fighting against the infidel with military stores*). It was a precept of Ottoman jurisprudence that infidels must be opposed with their own weapons. Such an ideology makes intelligible the demand for foreign military technology.

### Philosophy of Technology

There is a debate among historians of Islamic technology over the meaning of the mechanical arts (*hiyal*), particularly with respect to the building of elaborate models of clever machinery (mechanical clocks and the like) as in al-Jazari's thirteenth-century *Compendium of Theory and Useful Practice in the Mechanical Arts* (*al-Jami' bayn al-'ilm wa'l-'amal fi sina'at al-hiyal*), where *hiyal* (singular *hila*) means "artifices" or "devices." Jazari's definition of technology is a man-made device that performs actions contrary to the natural forces of nature, his example being the lever. His patron had praised him for making models and bringing them forth from potentiality (theoretical principles) into actuality (practical applications). Each *hila* gives palpable form to a specific concept of physics, according to al-Farabi and other medieval Muslim philosophers, following Aristotle's *Mechanical Problems*.

Ibn Khaldun, the great fourteenth-century polymath, expounded a philosophy of the craft trades in some detail, mixing Aristotelian explanation with his theory of the rise and fall of dynasties. In the *Muqaddimah,* he states that, first, crafts – which are concerned with both action and thought – have to be learned. That is, there is a mental component of technology (*'ilm*) that informs the mastering of a specific craft practice (*'amal*). Once mastered, such skills become rutinary and are performed by habit: "A habit is a firmly rooted quality acquired by doing a certain action and repeating it time after time, until the form of [that action] is firmly fixed." Crafts are mainly learned by observation, and the skills an apprentice acquires are owing not only to the quality of teaching but also to the "habit" of the teacher. It is in the mind that craft skills are transformed from potentiality into actuality (alluding to this well-known Aristotelian notion).

He then unites Aristotle's construction of technology with his own views on the environmental input. The skill level in crafts is also a function of the locus of demand: sedentary, urban civilization pushes the transformation of those skills from potentiality to reality. That is why the quality of urban craftsmanship is better than that of rural craftsmen because in the countryside the primary concern is survival. A small Bedouin settlement requires only the simplest of crafts: there, you will find a carpenter, a blacksmith, a tailor, a butcher, or a weaver. But their performance is imperfect and underdeveloped with respect to the same crafts in an urban setting.

Then he works in his dynastic cycle hypothesis: crafts are so rooted in cities that, even when those cities lose their wealth with dynastic decline, the craft skills learned and transmitted there are still substantially higher than those found in cities of new foundation. The example is al-Andalus, which, even though reduced to the kingdom of Granada, retained craft skills unequaled in any other Muslim Mediterranean polity. When a city is nearing senility, craft skills finally diminish.

#### References and Further Reading

- Barceló, M. (2004) "The Missing Water-Mill: A Question of Technological Diffusion in the High Middle Ages," in M. Barceló and F. Sigaut (eds), *The Making of Feudal Agriculture?* (Leiden: Brill).
- Bloom, J. (2001). *Paper before Print: The History and Impact of Paper in the Islamic World* (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press).
- Glick, T. F. (1995). "Moriscos and Marranos as Agents of Technological Diffusion," *History of Technology*, 17: 113–25.
- Glick, T. F. (2005). *Islamic and Christian Spain in the Early Middle Ages*, 2nd edn (Leiden: Brill).
- Glick, T. F. and Kirchner, H. (2000). "Hydraulic Systems and Technologies of Islamic Spain: History and Archeology," in P. Squatriti (ed.), *Working with Water in Medieval Europe: Technology and Resource-use* (Leiden: Brill), pp. 267–329.
- Ibn Khaldun (1958). *The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History*, trans. F. Rosenthal, 3 vols (New York: Pantheon).
- Saliba, G. (1985). "The Function of Mechanical Devices in Medieval Islamic Society," *Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences*, pp. 141–51.
- Schioler, T. (1973). *Roman and Islamic Water Lifting Wheels* (Copenhagen: Odense University Press). Watson, A. (1983). *Agricultural Innovation in the Early Islamic World: The Diffusion of Crops and Farming Techniques, 900 –1100* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
