---
images: []
order: 32
title: DAVID WITTNER
---

Much of Japan's technological history can be described as a dialogue. From the earliest times this dialogue took place between Japan and its East Asian neighbors, in particular China and Korea. Later it was an exchange between Japan and Western visitors. In the mid-nineteenth century and beyond, the government and the private sector fostered increased translation of foreign technical knowledge into Japan. Regardless of the era, there was also an internal discourse in which absorbed and indigenous technologies were transformed to suit local resources, needs and sensibilities.

There is clear evidence of technological interaction with China and Korea since at least the J¯omon period (c. 10,000 bce–300 bce) with the introduction of wet field agriculture in the fourth century bce. Japan first received iron and then bronze implements – primarily weapons, agricultural implements and ceremonial objects – from Korea and China throughout the Yayoi period (c. 300 bce–300 ce). Distinctively Japanese weaponry found at archeological sites indicates that the Japanese began working with iron and bronze based on continental interaction. A variety of ceremonial objects including bronze mirrors and glass beads were also imported and later manufactured in late Yayoi Japan. Perhaps an unfair characterization, much of Japan's history of technology until the seventh or eighth century reads more like a list of received innovations from the continent including irrigation techniques, plows, weaving, brewing, sericulture and paper-making.

Beginning with the Nara period (710–94), however, we can see greater indigenous development of technologies. Divergence from the Chinese model is especially notable in woodworking, textiles, ceramics, printing, paper-making, agriculture and metalworking. Much of what we know of technology from this era comes either from the artifacts, such as temple roof tiles or actual eighth-century buildings, or from a tenthcentury text, *Engi shiki*, which provides information on workshops in the capital that specialized in crafts such as paper-making, silk weaving, metal working, woodworking, and sake-brewing.

Beyond the *Engi shiki* and a variety of illustrated scrolls depicting craftsmen at work known as *shokunin zushiki-e*, our knowledge of technological developments during the late Heian (794–1185), Kamakura (1185–1333) and Muromachi (1338–1573) eras is mixed. During the Heian era there was a gradual breakdown of the traditional political system which, over the course of several centuries, led to the country being divided into semi-autonomous holdings known as *sh¯oen*. Crafts production, too, became compartmentalized as *sh¯oen* evolved into private estates. Craft traditions were transmitted orally, because most craftsmen were illiterate, and through a protective apprenticeship system that was largely hereditary. As in earlier eras, beyond illustrated scrolls and a few written records, much of our knowledge of technological change and development from this time comes from the artifacts themselves.

Accompanying the growth of private centers of political power in medieval Japan, came an increase in the number of urban centers whose inhabitants were primarily warriors, artisans and merchants. While there were some technological improvements in the countryside related to agriculture, the greatest area of change was in the cities where demands for luxury items, consumer goods, and weapons drove innovation.

Many artifacts and techniques that are now considered quintessentially Japanese were developed at this time. In woodworking, Japanese carpenters developed complex systems of joinery that required no mechanical fasteners. There was also some standardization of interior space with the increased use of tatami mats of uniform size. These innovations can be seen through religious and secular architecture. There were also developments in ceramics and textiles. Potters, silk-reelers, cotton-spinners and weavers moved their crafts, originally based on Chinese techniques, in directions that increasingly diverged from continental methods. During the latter half of the Muromachi era, know as the Sengoku or Warring States era (1467–1568), there was significant innovation in metalworking, especially as related to the military. Swordsmiths refined techniques for forging blades that exhibited the best qualities of hard and soft steel. Craftsmen working in bronze and fine metals refined the techniques for producing sword and weapon appurtenances such as *tsuba* (sword guards) and *menuki* (decorative pieces on a sword's grip). Many of these techniques were quickly translated into more mundane fields of daily ironworking or into the decorative arts.

Beginning in the mid-sixteenth century, Japan entered a period of heightened technological activity. Stimulated by increased trade with China and the arrival of the Portuguese, a series of new technologies were internalized by Japanese craftsmen. Aided by imported technical manuals, Japanese craftsmen made significant improvements to indigenous practices in paper-making – which further drove the production of indigenous manuals – metalworking, weaving, shipbuilding and navigation. Europeans also brought knowledge of optics, new techniques for glass-making, and improved techniques for amalgamation and mining. Having perhaps a greater impact on Japan's future technological development were two imported artifacts: firearms and the mechanical clock.

European firearms first arrived on Japan's shores in 1543 with the Portuguese. Quickly, Japanese metalworkers reverse-engineered these early matchlocks. In the course of several decades, firearms and light artillery played an important role in Japan's political unification. Japanese firearms development is a good example of technological dialogue. Craftsmen learned directly from Western sources, either the artifacts or the foreigners themselves. They modified the absorbed technologies, for example reversing the lock mechanism and protecting the powder tray from moisture. And, although firearms technologies were eventually monopolized by the *bakufu*, craftsmen also produced manuals with which to disseminate the technology.

Despite the decisive role played by firearms in Japan's political history, mechanical clocks, introduced in 1551, are in many ways more significant for the history of Japanese technology. In order to reproduce a mechanical clock, Japanese craftsmen were required to work with a greater degree of precision and at previously unknown levels of complexity. Precision gear manufacture, springs, bearings and axles/shafts fostered the refinement of metalworking and casting techniques that would have application beyond clock-making and craft industries. Over the course of the next century, many of the techniques developed by clock-makers found their way into a variety of applications. Automata, mechanical dolls, were the Tokugawa era (1603–1868) heir to the clock-maker's art. Gears, bearings and shafts (driven and driving) were also reproduced on a larger scale and in wood for a variety of agricultural applications such as pumps, water wheels and rolling mills. The *zaguri*, a gear- or belt-driven silk-reeling machine, was also a beneficiary of this technological dialogue. Eventually, these developments were to form part of the knowledge base that would help drive Japan's nineteenthcentury program of industrialization.

In 1639 the era of expanded contact with the West came to a close. With the exception of a Dutch trade factory on Deshima Island in Nagasaki harbor, and information obtained from China via Korea, the Tokugawa *bakufu* was largely successful in regulating contact with the West until the mid-nineteenth century. None the less, Japan continued to receive and absorb a variety of things from the Chinese mainland including books on agriculture, technology, medicine and mathematics. The most celebrated was a Ming dynasty text, *Tian Gong Kai Wu*, rendered in Japanese as *Tenk¯o kaibutsu* (*Development of the Works of Nature*), which contained information on agriculture and a variety of craft, mining and manufacturing techniques. The significance of this and other manuals was that they extended the technological dialogue. Techniques described for one field were often adapted to others. For example, early bell-casting techniques became the basis for Tokugawa-era cannon foundries, in much the same way that gears moved from clock-making to agricultural and textile machinery.

The nature of the Tokugawa political system had profound effects on the continued development of Japanese technology. The country was divided into a series of semiautonomous domains that responded to the authority of the Tokugawa shogun but vied with each other economically. At most levels, this created a barrier to the dissemination of technological information, yet it also nurtured a high degree of craft specialization as artisans within the various domains sought to create new regional products for a growing market. Through systematic experimentation, Tokugawa craftsmen cultivated a tradition that recognized the value of incremental innovation. Always looking for additional sources of income, domain lords (*daimy¯o*) supported the growth of local industry. As a result, craft technologies spread throughout the country on a relatively even basis. Craft distinction was seen through technique and attention to certain types of detail.

Despite the proliferation of craft technologies throughout the country and well beyond the confines of cities, many Tokugawa technologies were guarded within a system of hereditary apprenticeship. Families maintained control of the technologies and techniques by which they created unique and specialized goods. Their methods were labor-intensive, and technical innovations within most craft industries tended to be labor-intensive as well. Because Japan had a stable population throughout the Tokugawa era, and little in the way of an export market, there was no incentive to increase levels of production. Similarities can be seen in agricultural technologies

where an ample supply of labor inhibited the development of labor-saving devices. There was also a system of rural craft by-employment, driven by the sporadically labor intensive nature of Japanese farming. Farm families supplemented their income through cottage industries such as sericulture and silk-reeling. Sericulture is always labor intensive, but even more so in the Japanese case. Entire families would dedicate countless hours toward ensuring the health and well-being of silkworms. Absolute dedication to the most minute detail prevented Japan from experiencing the silkworm *pebríne* virus that devastated Europe's silkworm crop in the mid-nineteenth century. An ample supply of labor and possible concerns over product quality also prevented the rapid dissemination of the more efficient *zaguri* silk-reeling machine into many areas of the country. Although known, water-powered reeling machines were even less popular.

Yet Tokugawa technology was far from stagnant. Economic growth and the development of a market economy drove merchants and craftsmen, at the behest of *daimy¯o*, to bring a greater variety of products to market. This in turn gave rise to incremental innovations, new machines, techniques and tools. Simultaneously, the rise of commercial agriculture at the beginning of the eighteenth century led to the proliferation of agricultural manuals which, through illustrations and simplified text, discussed new techniques, tools, and methods by which to process agricultural products. Improvements in printing also helped spread technical craft manuals throughout Japan.

Technical knowledge of the time was not limited to crafts and agriculture. *Rangaku*, or "Dutch-learning," gained in popularity throughout the era with the educated classes. Alternately suppressed or finding favor with the *bakufu*, *Rangaku* scholars provided Japan with a basic knowledge of European science, medicine and technology in no particular order. For about a century following 1720, Western knowledge flowed into Japan. Scholars actively translated and published books on anatomy, physics, chemistry and electricity, to name just a few areas. As with other technical dialogue, Western knowledge found new applications once absorbed into Japan. Physician Hanaoka Seish¯o, for example, combined Western and Chinese medicine to perform probably the world's first surgery using general anesthesia.

As the tenor of Western visitors to Japanese waters rose in the mid-nineteenth century, so, too, did the importance of *Rangaku*. Caught in the debate of whether to open Japan to foreign intercourse or remain closed, *Rangaku* scholars were marshaled to the defense of the state. Early initiatives were taken by *daimy¯o* from domains that were traditionally hostile to Tokugawa authority. Regardless, their actions pushed Japan toward industrial modernization along Western lines. Based on the translation of an 1826 Dutch book on cannon-casting, samurai-scholars built and operated reverberatory and, later, blast furnaces with the ultimate goal of producing modern, Western-style artillery. Soon, iron and coal mines, shipyards and textile mills followed in the wake of *Rangaku* knowledge. The opening of Japan in 1854 signaled the end of *Rangaku*, although the school of learning provided an essential ingredient for Japan's rapid industrial modernization in the decades to follow.

The final years of the Tokugawa *bakufu* ushered in significant changes for Japanese technology. At first, attempts to modernize Japanese industry and defenses were made by the combined efforts of traditional craftsmen, who lacked Western scientific

and technical knowledge, and samurai-scholars, who lacked technical ability. Following 1854, however, foreign engineers, mechanics and adventurers made their way to Japan, first in the employ of the Tokugawa government or various domains, and later of the Meiji government. During the Meiji era (1868–1912), Japan underwent industrial modernization along Western lines. The first two decades can be considered a period of technological and scientific tutelage in which Japanese technologists, entrepreneurs and engineers experimented their way through the early stages of modernization. The period following 1886 is often considered Japan's industrial revolution, in which techniques – technologies and organization – internalized during the first decades of the Meiji era came to fruition.

The Meiji era perhaps best exemplifies Japan's technological dialogue. The government simultaneously imported technologies, either in the form of foreign artifacts or engineers; created institutions of higher and technical education; and indigenized foreign knowledge by hybridizing technologies in some instances and by the direct licensing of Western technologies in others. By casting its net widely, Japan was able to attain industrial modernization and a high degree of technological independence in a relatively short period of time.

In an era of high imperialism, Japan was spurred by slogans such as "Rich Nation, Strong Army," This translated into the development of export industries, such as silk-reeling, and heavy industries, such as shipbuilding and eventually an ironworks, for national defense and nation-building. Japan's victories over China in the Sino-Japanese War (1894–5) and Russia in the Russo-Japanese War (1904–5) further stimulated the technological dialogue. The First World War provided both an economic boom and a stimulus for industrial development. As a result of the war, and being cut off from German science and technology, the government and private industry created the Institute for Physical and Chemical Research, known by its abbreviated name Riken, in 1917. Based in part on the success of Riken and cooperation between the government and the private sector, heavy industry – most notably chemicals, shipbuilding, optics and aviation – grew substantially throughout the 1920s and 1930s. The success of Japan's program of industrial modernization carried it into and through the Second World War.

In the postwar era Japan continued to follow the pattern of technological development that has sustained it since the earliest times. With the support of government agencies such as the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI, established 1949) and the Science and Technology Agency (established 1956), Japan followed a coordinated policy of technological absorption and industrial development. Amongst other things, these agencies facilitated the licensing and dissemination of foreign technologies in Japan. As in earlier eras, Japanese industries modified foreign technologies. Often through a series of incremental innovations, such as miniaturization or artifact recombination, Japanese engineers created and patented indigenous variants of formerly foreign technologies.

Throughout the modern era, Japanese corporations, engineers and entrepreneurs have a consistent record of innovation that complements foreign achievement. Some Japanese innovations were based on foreign knowledge, others were more thoroughly indigenous developments. Examples include the first fully automatic power loom invented by Toyoda Sakichi in 1903, KS Magnetic Steel in 1917 by Honda K¯otar¯o, Yagi

#### david wittner

Hidetsugu's television antenna in 1926, Sony's introduction of the first video tape recorders for the home market in 1963, and the Sony Walkman in 1978. More recently, Sony has been responsible for much of the pioneering work in High Definition television; Japanese automotive engineers led the way in onboard navigation systems.

Because of the close ties between major Japanese corporations and small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) that serve as subcontractors, technologies originally introduced at the highest levels of Japanese industry are rapidly disseminated throughout the country. Japanese corporations also tend to invest a significant portion of their profits in research and development (R&D). Specifically they look to find innovative new applications for existing foreign and indigenous technologies. Although the trend has changed somewhat in the last decade, much R&D investment has been in applied technology rather than in basic research.

### References and Further Reading

- Aikens, M. C. and Takayasu, H. (1982). *The Prehistory of Japan: Studies in Archaeology* (New York: Academic Press).
- Farris, W. W. (1985). *Population, Disease, and Land in Early Japan: 645–900* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).
- Farris, W. W. (2006). *Japan's Medieval Population: Famine, Fertility, and Warfare in a Transformative Age* (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press).
- Low, M. F. (1996). "Japanese Science and Technology before Perry: Stagnation or Development?", *Asia-Pacific Magazine,* 2: 33–7.
- Low, M. (ed.) (2005). *Building a Modern Japan: Science, Technology, and Medicine in the Meiji Era and Beyond* (New York: Palgrave).
- Morris, D. (1999). "Land and Society," in D. H. Shively and W. H. McCullough (eds), *Cambridge History of Japan*, Vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 183–235.
- Morris-Suzuki, T. (1994). *The Technological Transformation of Japan: From the Seventeenth to the Twenty-first Century* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
- Okazaki, Takashi (1993). "Japan and the Continent," trans. J. Goodwin, in D. M. Brown (ed.), *Cambridge History of Japan*, Vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 268–316.
- Pauer, E. (ed.) (1995). *Papers of the History of Industry and Technology in Japan*, 3 vols (Marburg: Förderverein Marburger Japan-Reihe).
- Smith, T. C. (1988). *Native Sources of Japanese Industrialization, 1750–1920* (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press).
- Toby, R. P. (1984). *State and Diplomacy in Early Modern Japan: Asia and the Development of the Tokugawa Bakufu* (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press).
- Wittner, D. G. (2007). *Technology and the Culture of Progress in Meiji Japan* (London: Routledge).
