---
images: []
order: 33
title: Technology and War BART HACKER
---

The interplay of military institutions and changing technology has regularly made history. Military institutions, like other social institutions, organize major areas of values, attitudes and interests in the service of critical social needs. Unlike most social institutions, however, military institutions appear only in state or near-state societies. Armies were closely linked with the origin of civilization, may in fact have been a necessary, if not sufficient, cause for the transition to state organization and civilized life. Cause or not, military institutions remain very close to the core of complex societies. Throughout history, military technological innovation has led through military reorganization to significant societal change. By the same token, social change has regularly reshaped technology. Fundamental shifts in military technology and institutions may well serve as useful benchmarks for organizing a study of general history that addresses deeper structures of stability and change in addition to more superficial patterns of event and personality.

Through most of the Neolithic era, archeology provides few hints of armed forces or organized warfare anywhere in Eurasia. Neolithic sites rarely show signs of fortification, although walls became the hallmark of the cities that define civilization. Specialized weapons likewise seem to have been unknown. The first distinct weapon technology emerged with metallurgy in the transit to civilization. Other than ornaments, the earliest bronze artifacts are clearly weapons, not merely hunting tools that might double as man-killers. Walls and weapons were the physical manifestations of a social invention, the army. The Near Eastern invention of armies during the fourth millennium bce marked the first and greatest military revolution. It provided rulers with the means to organize coercive force, to control and direct the efforts of disparate individuals toward collective goals, to promote the disciplined order necessary to civilized life. When warfare became a corporate activity of hierarchically organized statesponsored armed forces, warriors gave way to soldiers, who marched on foot and fought in formation armed with mace, ax, sword, spear and shield. Cooperation and discipline mattered at least as much as individual prowess or courage. Armies became the bedrock upon which arose chiefdoms, states, kingdoms and empires. Developing armies and rising states went hand in hand. Military force, however modest, was the indispensable prelude to building states; growing states, in turn, yielded resources for enlarged armies. Armies decisively divided prehistory from civilization.

Mesopotamian city-states appear first to have crossed the military divide, followed closely by the kingdom of Egypt and soon by many others. A new weapon, the composite bow, joined the armory in the mid-third millennium bce. This mechanical innovation converted archery from an annoyance on the battlefield to a potentially decisive arm of great range and power. Composite bows demanded much time and skill to manufacture, making them very costly, but their revolutionary implications appear obvious, as the first great empires in the Near East coincided with their spread. When civilized military techniques spread to the hinterlands, a new dynamic evolved as the union of horse-drawn chariot and composite bow in the mid-second millennium bce fostered another military transformation. Armies built around relatively small numbers of chariot-borne bowmen swept all before them; on suitable terrain they appeared all but invincible. Chariot armies attacked civilized centers everywhere in Eurasia. Relatively fragile states in the eastern Mediterranean and south Asia collapsed under the assault, Mycenaean Greece and Vedic India rising on the ruins. Further east, Bronze Age charioteers may also have founded the first Chinese state, long identified with the Shang dynasty. Chariots themselves became potent symbols of power, widely adopted even in lands where they served little practical purpose.

By the late second millennium bce, elements of still other radical changes in military technology and organization began to coalesce. Cheap iron displaced costly bronze as the preferred metal for weapons and armor. Lower equipment costs swelled the potential numbers of men-at-arms, dulling the once-decisive edge enjoyed by aristocratic charioteers. When iron became common, infantry reasserted itself on the battlefield and remained the core of state armies for the next thousand years and more. The spread of iron technology coincided with another wave of internal upheavals and barbarian invasions, exemplified in the Greek dark ages. The demise of chariotry only temporarily interrupted the horse's military career. By the ninth century bce, after Eurasian steppe dwellers had learned how to draw the bow from horseback, mounted archers became the arbiters of battle. Equestrian techniques spread most widely on the fringes of civilized society. The lifelong association of steppe pastoralists with horses gave them an inherent and often decisive tactical advantage over sedentary farmers for the next two millennia. With this cavalry revolution began the long era when animal-herding nomads regularly threatened, and periodically conquered, their civilized neighbors.

Civilized societies could normally offset the tactical advantages of steppe horsemen or other invaders with larger populations and greater resources. By the first millennium bce, growing economies could support standing armies. Pioneered by the neo-Assyrian empire early in the millennium, then improved by the Persians, standing armies of even a few thousand men greatly reinforced central power and became the basis for even greater empires. Standing armies also helped shield civilized societies from outside attack, although raiders constantly probed the borders and their numbers might quickly swell into full-scale assault at signs of weakness or disorganization. For centuries, heavy cavalry armed with composite bows proved a most effective counter to nomad raiding. Essential to this success were the large, grain-fed horses first bred along the Iranian steppe frontier late in the first millennium bce. Bigger and stronger than grass-eating steppe ponies, they could carry riders armored against nomad weapons, yet move quickly enough to block most incursions. The result tended toward standoff because the great horses lacked the stamina for long pursuit and could not flourish on

the steppe's meager forage. Heavy cavalry was also expensive. Civilized societies could not match the integral place of horse and horsemanship in pastoral economy and society that made cavalry a straightforward expression of steppe culture. Creating, training and maintaining special-purpose cavalry absorbed substantial resources; how to meet the costs of such forces became a problem for every state that adopted them, and the costs might be more than economic. Feudalism, the answer pioneered on the Iranian frontier, created centers of local military power that regularly threatened central authority. Despite such problems, heavy cavalry provided an effective defense in depth against steppe raiding. Byzantium and China adopted their own versions without the feudal trappings; they maintained a centralized, tax-supported force to deal only with serious incursions.

As the second millennium ce began, the logistic demands of a million-man army helped prod Sung China toward an incipient industrial revolution. Military technological innovation also flourished under official auspices. Gunpowder made its first appearance in the historical record at the beginning of the eleventh century, the first true firearms toward the end of the thirteenth. Both spread rapidly from China throughout the civilized world. Gunpowder weapons rendered much existing fortification obsolescent. Everywhere in Eurasia during the mid-second millennium ce, great guns seemed to inspire military imaginations to a far greater degree than did small arms. Artillery improved rapidly, though every increase in power meant heavier, clumsier and costlier guns. In the attack and defense of fixed positions, such shortcomings mattered less than the enormous weight big guns could throw, and their great expense meant that central governments ordinarily enjoyed near-monopolies on their use. Throughout most of Eurasia, guns weakened all forms of resistance to central authority. Gunpowder empires – Ottoman in the Near East, Safavid in Iran, Mogul in India, and, in part, Ming in China – consolidated power across the ancient band of Asian civilization, while lesser empires spread on the periphery, in southeast Asia, in Japan and in Russia.

Only in the western reaches of Eurasia did the imperial impulse fail, though just barely. Economically innovative and intensely competitive European states had the resources to maintain strong armed forces and the motivation to keep them well practiced. That no individual state matched the power of the Habsburg Empire and its allies mattered little. Because the empire rarely enjoyed freedom to concentrate on a single opponent, smaller states could deploy forces well able to resist imperial aggrandizement. The pattern of interstate military competition that created the standoff persisted and intensified, with far-reaching consequences, not least among them the modern nation-state. European armed forces steadily expanded, weapons and tactics improved, and organization and coordination grew more sophisticated, in contrast to the relative stagnation that overtook military institutions in lands where empire had become firmly established. These early modern European innovations that Michael Roberts termed "the military revolution" may well have been the key factor that disrupted in the West's favor the rough parity in technology, economy and polity that prevailed until the fifteenth century among civilized communities all across the Old World.

Initially, the West enjoyed only a modest advantage, limited largely to the heavy guns of ocean-going sailing ships, a combination that far outclassed anything then afloat. Western enclaves flourished under shipborne guns along the coasts of Africa and Asia, and even expanded sporadically in India, but elsewhere Western forces could make little headway against either the vigorous new gunpowder empires in civilization's classic centers or the relatively weaker states of Africa and Southeast Asia. Before the nineteenth century, only Petrine Russia systematically sought to emulate Western arms and military organization. Europe felt the limits of power even in the less-developed world. Foes equipped with neolithic weapons doubtless facilitated the mid-secondmillennium European conquests in Mexico and Peru, as it did the later conquest of warlike chiefdoms in the Pacific, though such victories may have owed as much to Eurasian diseases as to European arms. Despite terrible losses, Native Americans survived the initial onslaught and learned how to fight back. Their success in keeping European colonization largely confined to the continental fringes for centuries owed much to skillful adaptations of firearms and equally skillful manipulation of rival Europeans to maintain sources of supply. Western firearms proved no less attractive in sub-Saharan Africa, where they became major factors in eighteenth- and nineteenthcentury state-building. They exerted a degree of fascination even in the old centers of civilization, though other aspects of Western culture seldom held much appeal.

But not until well into the nineteenth century, after military, scientific and industrial revolutions had worked their transformations, did Western arms achieve an almost uncontested hegemony over most of the world. Only then did Western military institutions become the model for all others. By the early twentieth century, the last of the old empires had passed away or transformed themselves – a process that began invariably with the adoption of Western weapons and the Westernization of their military institutions. Ottoman reform, Manchu self-strengthening and Meiji restoration are only the best-known instances. In the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, all armies became Western in organization, in equipment and in spirit. The most recent revolution in military affairs, as such transformations have lately come to be called, has taken the form of information control, based on the extraordinary development of electronics during the last half of the twentieth century, led by radio communication, electronic computing, and orbital satellites.

#### References and Further Reading

Carneiro, Robert L. (1970). "A Theory of the Origin of the State," *Science*, 169: 733–8.

Chase, Kenneth (2003). *Firearms: A Global History to 1700* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Drews, Robert (1993). *The End of the Bronze Age: Changes in Warfare and the Catastrophe ca. 1200 BC* (Princeton: Princeton University Press).

Drews, Robert (2004). *Early Riders: The Beginnings of Mounted Warfare in Asia and Europe* (London: Routledge).

Fields, Nic and Delf, Brian (2006). *Bronze Age War Chariots* (Oxford: Osprey).

Hacker, Barton C. (1994). "Military Institutions, Weapons, and Social Change: Toward a New History of Military Technology," *Technology and Culture*, 35: 768–834.

Hacker, Barton C. (1997). "Military Technology and World History: A Reconnaissance," *History Teacher*, 30: 461–87.

Hacker, Barton C. (2005). "The Machines of War: Western Military Technology 1850–2000," *History and Technology*, 21: 255–300.

Hacker, Barton C. and Vining, Margaret (2006). *American Military Technology* (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press).

- Hall, Bert S. (1997). *Weapons and Warfare in Renaissance Europe: Gunpowder, Technology, and Tactics* (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press).
- McNeill, William H. (1983). *The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society since AD 1000* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).
- Miller, Robert et al. (1986). "Experimental Approaches to Ancient Near Eastern Archery," *World Archaeology*, 18: 178–95.
- Parker, Geoffrey (1988). *The Military Revolution: Military Innovation and the Rise of the West, 1500–1800,* 2nd edn (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
- Yadin, Yigael (1963). *The Art of Warfare in Biblical Lands: In the Light of Archaeological Study*, trans. M. Pearlman, 2 vols (New York: McGraw-Hill).
