---
images: []
order: 35
title: DON IHDE
---

The term *technoscience* has come into vogue in the last two decades. It suggests a sort of hybrid combining of technology and science, and has been used by many of the best-known Science and Technology Studies writers ranging from Bruno Latour to Donna Haraway and others. Such a hybridization stands in contrast to an older usage which suggested not only distinct differences between science and technology, but also a clear relation of dependence of technology upon science, as in the once popular usage of "applied science" referring to most engineering in its modern sense. This usage prevailed well into the twentieth century and still exists as a title for some programs, but has increasingly been called into question.

Are we undergoing a major shift in the terms of the once *master narrative* which both characterized and distinguished technology and science? Paul Forman, intellectual historian and curator of Medicine and Science at the Smithsonian Institution, thinks so. In a recent special issue of *History and Technology* (vol. 23, 2007), he argued that intellectually there was a "primacy of science in modernity" and that this shifted to a primacy of "technology in postmodernity," but that this shift was not recognized until recently by historians owing to their own ideology. Part of Forman's thesis is that the watershed for the shift was roughly 1980, and with a historian's scrupulous footnoting – 424 of them! – he shows how, in modernity, it was presumed that science was the primary source of ideas, theories and practices which both defined it as "prior" to technology and also distinct from it.

The shift, of course, began to be glimpsed well before 1980; and Forman recognizes, for example, the prescient role played by Martin Heidegger in the mid-twentieth century. Heidegger's famous "The Question Concerning Technology" (1954) raises the question about the *ontological priority of technology over science.* In his convoluted way, Heidegger claimed:

Chronologically speaking, modern physical science begins in the seventeenth century. In contrast, machine-power technology develops only in the second half of the eighteenth century. But modern technology, which for chronological reckoning is the later, is, from the point of view of the essence holding sway within it, the historically earlier.

(1977: 23)

And Heidegger early on also points out that science itself uses and is dependent upon technologies:

It is said that modern technology is something incomparably different from all early technologies because it is based on modern physics as an exact science. Meanwhile, we have come to see that the reverse holds true as well: Modern physics, as experimental, is dependent upon technical apparatus and upon the progress in building technological apparatus.

(1977: 14)

While in some sense Heidegger is prescient concerning technoscience, in another – in his view that there is a sharp disjunction between modern and pre-modern technologies – he remains under the perspective of the primacy of science in modernity.

Clearly, in anthropological–historical terms, technologies as used by humans *predate modern humans (Homo sapiens)* since even our premodern ancestors used technologies for more than a million years prior to our own evolutionary emergence. But what of science? If the modernist master narrative is to be believed, this would make science much "later" than technology in a different sense. The modernist narrative places science, as with Heidegger, in the seventeenth century and, additionally, originating largely in a Western or European context in the Eurocentric narrative. But a Eurocentric interpretation of science is equally an invention of modernity and, as with the primacy of science over technology, is today under severe criticism. Its Eurocentrism, however, was not always taken for granted even in our own history. As early as the beginning of the seventeenth century, Francis Bacon claimed that the inventions which most benefited progress, and thus modernity, were paper-making, gunpowder, the magnetic compass and the movable-type printing press. But he also recognized that the inventors were the *Chinese*, who "completely changed the world's appearance . . . and displayed [the biggest] influence upon human progress" (1623). Thus, at the beginning of early modernity, what later became thought to be dominantly a Western and European science was not. Joseph Needham, much later, continued to chronicle Chinese technology, but he also claimed that this inventiveness died out and did not develop into the Western, theoretical science which became the ideal of late modernity.

If Forman is right, then the inversion of primacy – science with modernity and technology with postmodernity – poses a set of questions which arise with respect to technology and science and which begin to take different shapes contemporarily. One set of agreements would now seem to hold: the sciences are *instrumentally embodied.* But they are so embodied in different ways in the different sciences. While the positivist program earlier in the twentieth century included a hope for a unified science, ultimately related back to physics as foundational, it is clear in a postmodern era that such a program no longer is possible. Different sciences exhibit different science cultures and practices. For example, in astronomy, observation – until what is today called the *new astronomy* – had always been limited to what could be seen within the limits of optical light. Indeed, until early modernity the limits to optical light were also limits of what humans could themselves see within their limited and relative perceptual spectrum of human vision. With early modernity and the invention of lensed optical instruments – telescopes – astronomers could begin to observe phenomena never seen before.

Magnification and resolution began to allow what was previously imperceptible to be perceived – but within the familiar limits of optical vision. Galileo, having learned of the Dutch invention of a telescope by Hans Lippershey, went on to build some hundred of his own, improving from the Dutch 3x to nearly 30x telescopes – which turn out to be the limit of magnificational power without chromatic distortion. And it was with his own telescopes that he made the observations launching early modern astronomy (phases of Venus, satellites of Jupiter, etc.). Isaac Newton's later improvement with reflecting telescopes expanded upon the magnificational-resolution capacity of optical observation; and, from Newton to the twentieth century, improvement continued on to the later very large array of light telescopes today – following the usual technological trajectory of "more-is-better" but still remaining within the limits of the light spectrum. Today's astronomy has now had the benefit of some four centuries of optical telescopy. The "new astronomy," however, opens the full known electromagnetic spectrum to observation, beginning with the accidental discovery of radio astronomy early in the twentieth century, and leading today to the diverse variety of EMS telescopes which can explore the range from gamma to radio waves. Thus, astronomy, now outfitted with new instruments, "smart" adaptive optics, very large arrays, etc., illustrates one style of instrumentally embodied science – a technoscience. Of course astronomy, with the very recent exceptions of probes to solar system bodies (Moon, Mars, Venus, asteroids), remains largely a "receptive" science, dependent upon instrumentation which can detect and receive emissions.

Contemporary biology displays a quite different instrument array and, according to Evelyn Fox-Keller, also a different scientific culture. She cites her own experience, coming from mathematical physics into microbiology, and takes account of the distinctive instrumental culture in her *Making Sense of Life* (2002). Here, particularly with the development of biotechnology, instrumentation is far more *interventional* than in the astronomy case. Microscopic instrumentation can be and often is interventional in style: "gene-splicing" and other techniques of biotechnology, while still in their infancy, are clearly part of the interventional trajectory of biological instrumentation. Yet, in both disciplines, the sciences involved are today highly instrumentalized and could not progress successfully without constant improvements upon the respective instrumental trajectories. So, minimalistically, one may conclude that the sciences are *technologically, instrumentally embodied.* But the styles of embodiment differ, and perhaps the last of the scientific disciplines to move into such technical embodiment is mathematics, which only contemporarily has come to rely more and more upon the computational machinery now in common use. Isabel Stengers has seen, perhaps more clearly than many, the imaginative possibilities of such an instrumentally embodied mathematics, hinted at in her *The Invention of Modern Science* (2000). She glimpses the new styles of analysis which become possible through computer simulation, modeling and tomographical processes which are only now coming into preliminary maturity.

In a broad sense, of course, historians, anthropologists and archeologists have always known that technologies are "older" than science *if science is conceived of as it was by the modernist notion of science propagated by modern philosophy of science.* The Stone Age tool kit goes all the way back to *Homo erectus* and beyond. But other soft technologies, such as nets, fiber, bamboo and wood, also must go back into the prehistoric–premodern human. Wooden spear-shafts dated 400,000 bp have occasionally been discovered, but such discoveries are rare compared to Acheulean hand axes of 1,000,000+ bp. The historical commonplace, "Science owes more to the steam engine than the steam engine to science," which points to the historical fact that the questions which led to the discovery of the laws of thermodynamics came from questions of energy loss in early steam engines, not from observations of nature, is part of this pre-Forman shift to postmodernity's primacy of technology over science.

So how and why did modernity hold so tenaciously to the primacy of science? Part of the answer relates to the question: Who *interprets* science? And with respect to the twentieth century it is arguably the case that *philosophers of science* tended to prevail. Here several generalizations do seem to hold up: first, the paradigm or dominant science forefronted by philosophers of science in the twentieth century was *physics* – particularly mathematical physics – and its nearest relations. Earlier, one could argue that astronomy and cosmology occupied much of early modernity's interpretation, but even here the caveat is that the central interest of philosophers of science remained the laws of motion and their generalization into universality, thus, physics. The giants of early-twentieth-century philosophy of science were Pierre Duhem, Jules Henri Poincaré and Ernst Mach, all themselves mathematician-philosophers and all decreeing the mathematical "essence" of physics. Thus, the image of science which emerged from this set of interpreters was a science which was *ahistorical, acultural, "mathematical" or theoretical* and *context-free.* By the time of positivism and logical empiricism, most of that image of science was retained as was the centrality of theory-bias, although one could add a weighting to logical and propositional focii to the earlier mathematization emphasis, along with concerns with observation for verification purposes. Programs such as the unification of science and the proliferation of positivist philosophy of science in the universities are well-recognized parts of this part of the history of the philosophy of science to the mid-twentieth century. Rudolph Carnap, Hans Reichenbach, Herbert Feigl, Carl Hempel, Moritz Schlick et al. were some of these familiar names.

By mid-century, objections began to counter the positivist programs, and what today is usually called the "positivist-anti-positivist wars" began. Karl Popper, Imre Lakotos, Paul Feyerabend and pre-eminently Thomas Kuhn were the anti-positivist critics. And, although concrete *histories*, *instruments* and, to some degree, *experiments* begin to play a role in science interpretation, it was not until later in the twentieth century that a shift to a *praxis*, *laboratory* and new *experimental* focus began to overwhelm the earlier trajectory of theory-centered interpretation. Before leaving philosophers of science as key interpreters of science, the appearance in the 1980s, precisely after Forman's watershed year, of experiment- and instrument-oriented philosophy of science began to make inroads. Ian Hacking's *Representing and Intervening* (1983), with its marked shift to intervention and manipulation via experiment and instruments, was one landmark. Robert Ackermann followed with *Data, Instruments and Theory* (1985), and Peter Galison with *How Experiments End* (1987).

To this point, interpreters of science from the philosophy of science have been noted; but, even before the new experiment- and instrument-sensitive philosophy of science gained momentum, new challengers for interpretations of science which were *practice*oriented and focused upon experiments, instruments and laboratories were under way. This was especially marked by the new and largely "post-Mertonian" sociologies of science from both the United Kingdom and Europe. "Social Constructionism," "The Strong Programme" and "Actor Network Theory" by the mid-1980s were in strong contention with interpretations of science which looked at the social and sometimes material cultures of science. Here the names of Trevor Pinch, Harry Collins, Steve Woolgar, Michel Callon, Bruno Latour, Karin Knorr-Cetina began to appear. Philosophers of science had new interpretive competition, and the "wars" which occurred were an indirect recognition of the contention.

What of the philosophy of *technology*? For the most part, one can say that the philosophy of technology is primarily a twentieth-century development. While, at the end of the nineteenth century, the two neo-Hegelians, Ernst Kapp and Karl Marx, both turned "idealism" upside down and began to look at technologies and productive processes as leading to, or even determining, societal outputs, it was only after the strongest effects of the Industrial Revolution and the emergence of militarized technologies from the two world wars that major philosophers looked deeply and seriously into technology. With the exception of John Dewey on the American scene, most early philosophy of technology was European, and mostly deriving from what could be called the more *praxis*oriented traditions such as Marxian, phenomenological, and including American pragmatism. Looking back over the last century, there is now close to a consensus regarding the beginnings of the philosophy of technology. Publications range from Carl Mitcham's well-recognized history of the philosophy of technology, *Thinking through Technology: The Path between Engineering and Philosophy* (1994), to the work of the Twente group of philosophers of technology under the leadership of Hans Achterhuis with *De Maat van de techniek* (1992) and *Van Stoommachine tot Cyborg: denken over techniek in de nieuwe wereld* (1997), later translated with updates into *American Philosophy of Technology: The Empirical Turn* (2001). Following Achterhuis, one could characterize early-twentieth-century philosophy of technology as concerned with technology-ingeneral at a "transcendental" level; as often dystopian in tone; and as portending an end to the modern era. Friedrich Dessauer, a neo-Kantian, and Martin Heidegger both addressed technological themes as early as 1927; but Ortega y Gasset, Karl Jaspers, many of the principals of the Frankfurt School, including Adorno, Herbert Marcuse and Jürgen Habermas, also began to write about technological themes. In contrast to these early-to-mid-twentieth-century thinkers, in the later twentieth century a second generation of philosophers of technology were seen as taking an "empirical turn" to the closer-up examination of a plurality of particular technologies, as more pragmatic in outlook; and as democratic in aim. Achterhuis's *American Philosophy of Technology* includes introductions to Albert Borgmann, Hubert Dreyfus, Andrew Feenberg, Donna Haraway, Don Ihde and Langdon Winner as those who are located under the new descriptions. With respect to technologies and science, I will mention my *Instrumental Realism: The Interface between Philosophy of Science and Philosophy of Technology* (1991), which addresses a wide spectrum of both philosophers of science and philosophers of technology with emphasis upon science's technologies. And my earlier *Technics and Praxis: A Philosophy of Technology* (1979) had already argued that science has all along been technologically embodied.

Thus, from an enlarging field of differently based interpreters, the roles of technology vis-à-vis science have become more visible from the late twentieth century into the twenty-first. In this section of the *Companion to the Philosophy of Technology*, the contributors to the themes of technology and science again also actually display a variety of opinions, clearly calling into question any "standard view" of the primacy of science over technology, but not often going so far as to invert the relationship to a "Heideggerian" one of the primacy of technology over science, nor to the hybridization of technology and science into a technoscience.

Three of the contributing philosophers – incidentally all from the Netherlands – all recognize the contemporary shift which has occurred in philosophies of science. Hans Radder notes that, from the earlier, one could say more elitist perspectives of "scientism" and "technocracy," current shifts towards "methological naturalism" and "critical normativity" are also more concrete and, one could say, empirical, with respect to the earlier and more ideological tones of the last century. Bart Gremmen claims that the science–technology relationship to the seventies was dominated, again, by the theory concerns of philosophy of science, thus confirming the modernist frame suggested by Forman as well. Gremmen, however, sees something like an interaction schema replacing the modernist one, in which there remains a certain distinction between technology and science and the interrelation of the cognate philosophies thereof. And Mieke Boon, quite aware of the emergence of the notion of technoscience, sees the shift centering on emphases on a "new experimentalism" related both to philosophy of science and philosophy of technology, but also relates this to a movement toward recognizing a unique style of *technological knowledge*. In all three cases, the older traditions of a strong distinction between *episteme* and *techne* are called into question.

Indeed, the largest group of contributors to this section could be characterized as interested precisely in forms of "technological knowledge." Anthonie Meijers and Marc de Vries make technological knowledge their primary theme, arguing against now dated notions of "applied science" and for a distinct and recognizable *technological* knowledge. Peter Kroes argues, in a parallel vein, that, in so far as engineering and design must take into account human needs, actions and values there can be something like a history of intentionality which plays into the human–technical juncture. Somewhat more extreme, Wiebe Bijker, one of the principals in the social construction of technology movement, shows a wide spectrum of social–cultural aspects which permeate technologies, drawing from some of his past work on specific technological developments. Louis Bucciarelli, while allowing as a background phenomenon the older notions of science, forefronts the notion of an *engineering science,* again having its own validity as a type of knowledge. Along with Kroes and Meijers and de Vries, function plays a strong role. Keekok Lee plays a similar role in the critique of the ancient *episteme/techne* distinction when dealing with technology and biology. The very notion of a biotechnology and its manipulations and constructions of new biological entities belies such ancient distinctions. Finally, in some respects coming the closest to an inversion of the modernist primacy-of-science notion, are the essays of Helge Kragh, W. J. Nuttall and Andrew Pickering. All hold, in different contexts and for different sciences, variants upon how new technologies or discoveries in technologies not only impact upon science, but also effectively invent to stimulate new sciences. Kragh does this historically with respect to chemistry: the discoveries of phosphorus, soda and sulfuric acid were all made either accidentally or serendipitously and led to one of the first "Big Sciences" in chemistry, without benefit of theoretical science which only later could deal with the atomic and

molecular theory needed to have such a chemical science. Nuttall, by tracing aspects of nuclear science and the development of nuclear weaponry, shows how, once again, a set of technologies carries enormous implications for the practices, politics and formation of science – in this case Cold War physics and engineering. Pickering, again drawing from developments in the same era, takes cybernetics as yet another "technological" development which leads to a new type of science, one still under development in a number of science disciplines. These entries, not unlike that of the steam-engineto-thermodynamics maxim cited above, come the closest to the primacy of technology over science in a postmodern sense. And in all cases it is clear that a modernist consensus regarding the sheer primacy of science over technology no longer holds for most contemporary thinkers. And it should equally be clear that the "thin" and theory-biased image of science, often narrowly concerned with physics, has equally been called into question. A more complicated image of science, in some ways actually looking more like a technologically practiced science, has emerged. Such a science is, or has, cultural, historical, contextual, social–political features – and is, as Larry Laudan proclaims for all contemporary philosophy of science – fallibilistic.

If the ground has shifted, particularly with respect to modernism, and, if the criticisms of modernism need to take into account cultures, histories, technologies, what would a *technoscience interpretation* of the relations between technology and science look like? Here, rather than take the direction taken by Forman concerning the "primacy of technology," this reframing will examine a more symbiotic technology/science direction, one suggested by the term "technoscience." This, too, would be a reframing of the question, but one which reflects some aspects of a more *pragmatist* interpretation. Such a reframing would hold that (*a*) the style of robust, repeatable and dependable knowledge which we identify with science *has always been a process which entails technologies*; (*b*) since it is a human activity which responds to needs for knowledge in a variety of contexts, it should be identifiable wherever and whenever it has occurred; and (*c*) it can also be variously contexted, relative to the needs and shapes of the societies into which such practices fit. This reframing, as will be shown, ends up being multicultural, occurring in many different places and times, and is developmental, particularly with respect to the refinement and progression of the technologies used in producing the knowledge entailed.

Once again, this reframing narrative begins with the very ancient science – astronomy. Even our prehistoric ancestors observed the celestial motions of the night-time skies and very early on began to develop *calendars*, which are one form of "writing" technology which can make repeatable patterns available, including passing on a record for later generations to recognize. Moon phases have been found marked on reindeer antlers, counting-sticks and the like, going back at least as far as the Ice Age images of 30,000+ bp. The full lunar and solar calendars, some more accurate than those of the European Middle Ages, can be found in a number of ancient civilizations stretching from the Middle East to Meso-America. And the writing technology of the calendarartifact is, as contemporary archeoastronomy has now shown, not the only technology relevant to the ancients. *Observational instruments* also played an apparent role. It has long been surmised that Stonehenge (4500 bp) was used as an observational instrument; and, as Anthony Aveni and Dick Teresi have pointed out, similar stone rings, sighting tunnels and the like have been found aligned with ancient observations

in many areas of the globe. In fact, some are so ancient that only by taking into account the shift in precession changes in celestial alignment can dating of prime usage time be established (Amerindian rings have been dated for such usage at least 3000 bp). The point here is simple: observations of this sort have been made in many cultures, in great antiquity, and were both recorded on various forms of writing technologies and observed by means of simple instruments. Is this, then, ancient technoscience? If so, it has plural origins, but can also accommodate our own standard history, which also includes significant discoveries. Robert Crease's *The Prism and the Pendulum* (2006) is a monograph responding to a physics educators' poll concerning the ten most beautiful experiments in science history. The most cited example was from Hellenic Greek times, that of Eratosthenes' measurement of the circumference of the earth. By using a gnomon, a stick sundial which at the summer solstice cast no shadow, combined with relatively simple geometry with a known distance between two cities – one the observation site, the second where the angle of shadow could be measured – through simple triangulation he was able to produce a respectable measurement of the earth's circumference. This, too, is an instrumental-styled, mathematically interpreted technoscience, this time within our standard master narrative theme.

The reframing being suggested here takes account of both multicultural instances of science, better technoscience, and of its embeddedness in both a material culture and material instrumentalization. And, while few recent authors have ventured into the multicultural aspect of this territory, some have made significant gestures in this direction, including: Sandra Harding with *Is Science Multicultural?* (1998); Dick Teresi, *Lost Discoveries: Ancient Roots of Modern Science* (2002)*;* Helaine Selin's massive *Encyclopedia of the History of Science, Technology and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures* (1997). Such studies only now begin to expand and supplement the older traditions – such as those of Bacon to Needham mentioned above – which recognize only limited non-Western technoscience origins such as China. What emerges is a different, more scattered, but also more understandable profile of scientific and technological inventions and discoveries. For example, and again only due to contemporary dating techniques, it is beginning to be understood that grain domestication occurred in many different places of the earth roughly between 8000 and – 10,000 bp, in the Middle East, in Asia, and even in Meso-America – and with different grain combinations, usually a dominant grain or a few dominant grains, with most grains not undergoing selection for hypertrophism. Thus, wheat, rice and corn respectively fit into the samples above; but other examples, too, have begun to be recognized (figs, squash and beans, and the like). Granted, there is a kind of irony with both why and how such a reframing can take place in postmodernity. The irony is that only contemporarily do we have the instrumentation to determine with accuracy the dating, the identification of the materials involved and thus the recognition of past, often previously lost practices. This same inventiveness, the multiculturalists have begun to recognize, can also occur in much more abstract activities. Teresi points out, along with others such as Robert and Elaine Kaplan, that "zero" has been invented a number of times in a number of ancient cultures. The Babylonians may have been first with zero as a place-holder 3800 bp, but later with a genuine zero, 3100 bp; but Hindu culture also invented zero, and, from these sources in Asia and the Middle East, Arabic culture borrowed and then conveyed the notion of zero into a reluctant and late European culture which, only on accepting Arabic number concepts, incorporated zero into its own system. And, although very separate from the Old World cultures mentioned, the Mayans also independently invented zero. Thus, once again, one must call into question the monodimensionality of the older master narrative so much taken for granted in Eurocentric histories. The antiquity of writing is another multi-origin example: cuneiform writing continues to hold its place from at least 6000 bp in the Old World history, but twentieth-century finds of tortoiseshell writing from China now also equal a 6000 bp dated origin. Here, then, a pragmatist human-inventivity model for the production of tools again allows for the recognition of such a pluralistic set of histories.

Admittedly, much of the ancient knowledge now re-emerging had disappeared. There does not seem to be anything like a single continuous history of sciences any more than there is a continuous history of "civilization" as such. But, within these plural histories, there are also telling examples of how technologically progressive trajectories lead both to refinements of knowledge and to breakthroughs. As noted, astronomy underwent a many-millennia period limited to human visual observation in relation to simple, fixed observational instruments. Lenses qualitatively changed the range and type of observation possible and allowed for the four-century history familiar to the Eurocentric account. Interestingly, sunspots and their periodicity was first noted by Galileo in the early seventeenth century with the aid of a telescope of his own design, and which included a helioscope to cast sunspot images on a screen. In China, however, sunspot activity had been noted and charted since 2500 bp by Gan De, Shi Shen and others. Without telescopes, how could these phenomena be observed? While the answer is not definitive, one can note that very early lens development in China included the use of dark quartz, which could have been used for precisely such sightings. Yet, in spite of the earlier charting of sunspot activity in China and the later charting in early modernity, the discovery of the eleven-year sunspot cycle and its relation to auroral activity had to await later modernity in spite of the fact that the charts from antiquity evidence this pattern. The point being made is that technologies, instrumentation, mediate and make possible different and refined observations. And, in one sense, this becomes even more pronounced in late modernity, as Peter Galison has pointed out in *Einstein's Clocks, Poincaré's Maps: Empires of Time* (2003). The history and discovery of special relativity and its relationship to time relates to the more accurate time-keeping which became possible only in the twentieth century. Until clocks were both accurate enough to measure microseconds, and put into synchonized systems – such as the various proposals for a universal time to govern railway traffic which patents Albert Einstein dealt with in his 1905 career – could the clearer implications of relativistic time be more deeply probed. Galison shows how this technological lifeworld is the concrete context within which relativity is conceived.

Thus, the framing being suggested here, in both its pragmatist sense which emphasizes human inventiveness in its material dimension including technologies, and in a phenomenological sense in which human perception and embodiment plays a role, can more fully accommodate a technoscience, or hybridized technologies and sciences in what can be understood as both symbiotic in relationship and multicultural in origin and pluralistic in both temporal and geographic localities can here come into view.

### References and Further Reading

Achterhuis, H. (1992). *De Maat van de techniek* (Baam: Ambo).

Achterhuis, H. (1997). *Van Stoommachine tot Cyborg: denken over techniek in de nieuwe wereld* (Baam: Ambo).

Achterhuis, H. (2001). *American Philosophy of Technology: The Empirical Turn* (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press).

Ackermann, R. (1985). *Data, Instruments and Theory* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).

Aveni, A. (2008). *People and the Sky* (London: Thames & Hudson).

Bacon, F. (1623). *The New Atlantis*.

Crease, R. (2006). *The Prism and the Pendulum* (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Forman, P. (2007). "The Primacy of Science in Modernity, of Technology in Postmodernity, and of Ideology in the History of Technology," *History and Technology,* 23 (1–2): 1–152.

Fox-Keller, E. (2002). *Making Sense of Life* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).

Galison, P. (1987). *How Experiments End* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).

Galison, P. (2003). *Einstein's Clocks, Poincaré's Maps: Empires of Time* (New York: W. W. Norton).

Hacking, I. (1983). *Representing and Intervening* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Harding, S. G. (1998). *Is Science Multicultural?* (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press).

Heidegger, M. (1977). *The Question Concerning Technology.* (New York: Harper Torchbacks). German, 1954.

Ihde, D. (1979). *Technics and Praxis: A Philosophy of Technology.* (Dordrecht: Reidel).

Ihde, D. (1991). *Instrumental Realism: The Interface between Philosophy of Science and Philosophy of Technology* (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press).

Kaplan, E. and Kaplan, R. (1999). *The Nothing That Is: A Natural History of Zero* (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Laudan, L. (1996). *Beyond Positivism and Relativism* (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press).

Mitcham, C. (1994). *Thinking through Technology: The Path between Engineering and Philosophy* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).

Selin, H. (1997). *Encyclopedia of the History of Science, Technology and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures* (Dordrecht: Kluwer).

Stengers, I. (2000). *The Invention of Modern Science* (Minneapolis, Minn.: University of Minnesota Press).

Teresi, D. (2002). *Lost Discoveries: Ancient Roots of Modern Science* (New York: Simon & Schuster).
