---
images: []
order: 37
title: HANS RADDER
---

The notion of positivism, which is primarily used in relation to science, is notoriously ambiguous. Karl Popper, for one, strongly argued against positivist philosophy of science *and* was sharply criticized for being a positivist philosopher of science himself. In epistemology, positivism is often seen as equivalent to empiricism; in philosophy of science, it usually means "anti-realism"; in methodological discourse, it frequently refers to a unity-of-science approach according to which the social sciences should follow the methodology of the natural sciences; in social science, it commonly stands for a preference of quantitative over qualitative methods; and in ontological debates it may denote reductionist or materialist positions.

Clearly, some limitation and clarification is in order, the more so since not all of these senses of positivism will be equally relevant to both science and technology. For the purpose of this essay, I start with the influential views of (the early) Jürgen Habermas, who conceived of science and technology as being intrinsically related. Habermas proposes a very broad characterization of positivism as the view that, because of their obvious successes, there is no need for a critical reflection on science and technology "as such." The latter qualification is important, since positivism acknowledges, and even explicitly aims to criticize, the occurrence of particular deviations from scientific or technological rationality.

In addition to this, positivism often includes a stronger normative view, saying that a scientific or a technological approach is the best, or even the only legitimate, approach to tackle any economic, socio-cultural or personal problem. Put differently, positivism equates knowledge with science and accordingly claims that only science and science-based technology can bring us material and social progress. In the case of science, this approach is called scientism; in the case of technology, one speaks of technocracy. Such views are still quite current (though not unchallenged) among scientists, technologists, policy-makers, politicians and the general public. For instance, a scientistic approach to human intelligence holds that intelligence is what IQ tests measure, and a technocratic policy proceeds by replacing culturally specific actors' notions of intelligence with scientific practices, such as testing children at school and adults during application procedures. Or, in the face of the threatening exhaustion of fossil fuels, technocracy advocates a technological fix through a strong expansion of nuclear power (despite its many unsolved problems), while legitimate concerns are being silenced through

the scientistic strategy of distinguishing between the objective risk revealed by the scientific experts and the merely perceived (and hence subjective and unreal) risk of the lay critics.

In his *Knowledge and Human Interests*, Habermas (1978) criticizes Auguste Comte's and Ernst Mach's positivist views of science for being unreflexive. They focus on methodological and epistemological issues, such as the function of scientific experience and the nature of scientific theories. In doing so, they forgo the reflexive Kantian question of the general conditions of the possibility of scientific knowledge. As already mentioned, Habermas sees this "disavowal of reflection" as the core problem of positivism. Positivism unjustly takes the factual successes of the scientific approach to be enough epistemic justification and social legitimation. Against this, Habermas first points to the significance of human, instrumental or experimental action as the condition of the possibility of scientific knowledge; second, he claims that critical reflection on science should take full account of communicative action, which is the condition of the possibility of the interpretive humanities and, more generally, of mutual understanding in our life-world. That is to say, the sphere of communicative action constitutes a more basic outside "position" from which the development of science may be critically questioned. Thus, Habermas' critique of positivism in science results in assigning science its proper place, relative to the interpretive disciplines and to our life-world. Science is a legitimate human endeavor, but it is also one-sided, and hence its unconstrained expansion should be counteracted from the sphere of communicative action.

Something similar applies to technology since, according to Habermas, science is intrinsically related to technology, with experimentation being the crucial link. Both science and technology aim at prediction and control of the events studied theoretically and realized experimentally or technologically. Technology has its proper place as an instrumental means for supporting the survival of individual human beings and of human kind more generally. All too often, however, technology intrudes on, and intends to replace, communicative discourse and action concerning societal goals (see Habermas 1971). Positivism provides an ideological underpinning of this improper "colonization of the life-world," since it claims that the actual practices of science and technology need not, and should not, be normatively constrained from an independent domain of communicative action.

It is along these lines that Habermas analyzes and criticizes the scientistic and technocratic doctrines of positivism. Yet one may argue that Habermas' approach still includes a positivist residue: because of his claim that the validity of scientific facts and the effectiveness of technological artifacts are independent of *particular* societal interests and *specific* norms and values, his account of the conditions of the possibility of science and technology is inadequate. Science and technology are seen as yielding universally valid knowledge and objectively working tools that are normatively neutral and acquire value only when applied for specific social purposes. Thus, laser science and technology as such provide neutral knowledge and effective tools, which only become value- and interest-laden when used, for instance for healing or for killing people.

More recent studies of scientific practice, however, have claimed that scientific knowledge is never neutral and universally valid, but socially constructed on the basis of particular social goals and interests or as a result of specific processes of social negotiation (see Barnes, Bloor and Henry 1996). Thus, the new experimental procedures advocated by Robert Boyle and the dispute about those procedures between Boyle and Thomas Hobbes are claimed to depend crucially on a local aspect of the seventeenthcentury English social order. In technology, the "validity" – that is, the objectivity and effectiveness – of technological artifacts and systems has similarly been claimed to be socially constructed through negotiation among involved actors or through powerful individual and institutional system-builders (Bijker, Hughes and Pinch 1987). Illustrations are the development of the bicycle in the last decades of the nineteenth century and the evolution of the system of electric light and power in Western societies between 1870 and 1940. At present, such detailed studies of scientific and technological practice abound. They have been framed into a comprehensive (social) constructivist research tradition. This tradition may be characterized as broadly naturalistic: it focuses on accurate empirical description and explanation of actual scientific or technological practices with the help of (social) scientific methods.

Thus, from a (social) constructivist perspective, Habermas himself is still a captive of positivism in that he endorses its untenable doctrines of the universality and neutrality of science and technology. One reason for holding these mistaken views is the abstract nature of Habermas' theorizing, which does not include any illustrations from science or technology, let alone extensive studies of actual scientific or technological practices. But how does (social) constructivism itself relate to positivism? In terms of Habermas' characterization, constructivist reflection has explored in great detail not only the general but especially the particular conditions of the possibility of science and technology. More specifically, constructivism has emphasized the methodological and epistemological disunity and the ontological multiplicity of the sciences (see Mol 2002). Furthermore, in their explicit declarations, constructivists do not endorse the strongly normative claims of scientism and technocracy. For these reasons, the constructivist tradition might be classified as anti-positivist.

Yet one important element of Habermas' anti-positivism is missing from this tradition. Habermas advocated not mere reflection on the conditions of possibility of science and technology, but *critical* reflection in the sense of including a normative critique of the roles of science and technology in our present society. In contrast, many naturalistic studies of science and technology claim to provide no more than an impartial description or explanation of scientific and technological practices, and quite a few argue strongly against taking a normative stance on the scientific and technological issues they study.1 Put differently, while constructivists have rightly questioned the rigid contrast between science and society, made by both the positivists and Habermas, they have wrongly concluded that this also entails the dissolution of the notion and possibility of critical normativity. The latter, however, is a non sequitur (see Winner 1993; Radder 1996, chs 5 and 8).

Consider, for instance, Habermas' emphasis on the importance of the notions of technological prediction and control. These notions may be reinterpreted as being *theoretically* necessary for successfully realizing a stable and reproducible technology (see Radder 1996, chs 6 and 7). Of course, it remains a matter of empirical study to see whether or not this success has materialized in actual practice. None the less, the

*attempt* at realizing stable and reproducible technologies may be critically assessed for two reasons. A first question is whether the required material and social control needed for successfully realizing a stable and reproducible technology can be reasonably expected to be feasible. If not, we should refrain from realizing this specific technology. But, second, even if this material and social control can be successfully realized, the normative question should be asked whether living in such a controlled world is seen as desirable. If not, we have another reason for not realizing this specific technology. The two points can be illustrated with the example of nuclear energy. In this case, there are good reasons for questioning the feasibility of keeping the system of nuclear power production stable and reproducible (and hence safe) during a period of decades, centuries, and longer. Moreover, even if this control were feasible, there is the question of the desirability of the strict control and discipline needed to keep this technology stable and reproducible.

Andrew Feenberg's critical theory of technology constitutes another approach that combines theoretical, empirical and normative insights. Feenberg (1999) identifies two different "aspects" or "levels" of technology: the *functional constitution* of technical objects and subjects, called primary instrumentalization, and the actual *realization* of the constituted objects and subjects, called secondary instrumentalization. Thus, technology instrumentalizes humans and nature in two distinct ways. The distinction is analytic, meaning that in any actual technological artifact or system both aspects always go together. Feenberg develops this theory of technology by adding further characteristics of the two notions of instrumentalization. He specifies four "reifying" moments of primary instrumentalization (decontextualization, reductionism, autonomization and positioning) as well as four "integrating" moments of secondary instrumentalization (systematization, mediation, vocation and initiative). Primary instrumentalization is claimed to entail universal characteristics of technologies. Secondary instrumentalization creates further characteristics that might vary in principle but are in fact fixed by the dominant values and interests of a particular social group or society. The aim of Feenberg's critical approach, then, is to expose these underlying values and interests, and to argue for alternative – that is to say less oppressive and more democratic – secondary instrumentalizations of the technologies in question. An example of such a "democratic rationalization" is the bottom-up hacking of the French Minitel system in the early 1980s.

The aim of this essay has been to point to some of the central issues in past and present debates about positivism and anti-positivism in science and technology. While the older disputes focused on the doctrines and practices of scientism and technocracy, more recent approaches discuss the pros and cons of methodological naturalism and critical normativity.

### Note

1. For reasons of space, the present discussion is restricted to constructivist studies of science and technology. Of course, "naturalism" is a much broader category, including for instance the influential evolutionary approaches to the study of science and technology (see, e.g., Lelas 2000).

#### References and Further Reading

- Barnes, B., Bloor, D. and Henry, J. (1996). *Scientific Knowledge: A Sociological Analysis* (London: Athlone Press).
- Bijker, W. E., Hughes, T. P. and Pinch, T. (eds) (1987). *The Social Construction of Technological Systems* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Feenberg, A. (1999). *Questioning Technology* (London: Routledge).
- Habermas, J. (1971 [1968]). "Technology and Science as 'Ideology'," in J. Habermas, *Toward a Rational Society* (London: Heinemann), pp. 81–122.
- Habermas, J. (1978 [1968]). *Knowledge and Human Interests*, 2nd edn (London: Heinemann).
- Lelas, S. (2000). *Science and Modernity. Toward an Integral Theory of Science* (Dordrecht: Kluwer). Mol, A. (2002). *The Body Multiple: Ontology in Medical Practice* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press).
- Radder, H. (1996). *In and about the World: Philosophical Studies of Science and Technology* (Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press).
- Winner, L. (1993). "Upon Opening the Black Box and Finding It Empty: Social Constructivism and the Philosophy of Technology," *Science, Technology and Human Values*, 18: 362–78.
