---
images: []
order: 40
title: LOUIS L. BUCCIARELLI
---

"Engineering science" refers to either a body of knowledge or the activity which generates that body of knowledge. Engineering science *as knowledge* is codified in the textbooks used in undergraduate courses in engineering – courses in thermodynamics, solid mechanics, fluid mechanics, aerodynamics, mechanical vibrations, electronics, wave propagation, materials science, control system theory and now biomechanics, computer science and nano-whatever. These domains – and there are others – constitute the "engineering sciences." Engineering science *as an activity* is the research engaged by faculty allied with departments of mechanical, electrical, chemical, civil engineering – many of which teach the undergraduate engineering science courses. Industry, too, has its research laboratories where engineers do engineering science. And there is something of a history of the engineering sciences, but we will not say much about that. (See B. Seely, "Research, Engineering, and Science in American Engineering Colleges: 1900–1960," *Technology and Culture*, 34 [April 1993]: 344–86.)

The question arises: How is engineering science, as a body of knowledge and/or research activity, distinguished from ordinary science? One claim made is that scientists seek truth, to reveal nature's secrets, knowledge for knowledge's sake, etc. Engineers seek to make things work in accord with their designs. They care less about truth. They aim for a robust and reliable design, increased efficiency, or higher productivity and profit. The purpose of their work is perhaps the most important and oft-stated factor distinguishing the work of engineers from the work of scientists. But does this distinction apply when we focus on those engineers with advanced degrees who spend their time in a laboratory doing research?

Another useful way to attempt to distinguish science from engineering science is to consider the kinds of phenomena studied by scientists and by engineers active in research. Here we seem to be on firmer ground. In line with the pragmatic orientation of the engineer, the engineer as researcher studies the behavior of a product of human agency – an artifact – or a phenomenon intimately associated with that behavior. The scientist studies natural phenomena – events and processes of widely varying scale in space and time.

We can take this a bit further: Because the object of research of the engineer is an artifact, its "nature" is malleable. Engineers doing research in materials science is perhaps the best example of this. Moved to make it stronger, lighter, less susceptible to

corrosion, more easily mass-produced, etc., the engineer as researcher will analyze, reconstitute, run the test again, seeking the desired outcome. (This is not the case for the physicist, the chemist or the biologist – at least according to the traditional picture of what the natural scientist does in a laboratory. We leave aside what a constructivist might claim. Alternatively, one might claim that, if the natural scientist does have the ability to shape the object of research, and does so, then he or she is doing engineering.). In such a context, what does objectivity mean?

This ability to alter, not just the assumptions in an analysis or the conditions of an experiment, but the actual object under study itself, may be why engineers seem less dogmatic in their assertions about the ontological status of the objects and entities that enter into the phenomena they study. Whereas the natural scientist, according to the traditional picture, posits the existence of entities as fact, the conjectures of an engineer are fully acceptable if stated in the form "If *x* is modeled as a *z*, then *y,*" knowing full well that *x* is not really a *z*; i.e. "If we assume the beam behaves as an elastic, perfectly plastic material, then collapse of the beam will occur when the weight at the end exceeds 1,000 pounds." The "truth" of the assertions rests on the usefulness of the results of the research, i.e. "*that which is true is what is useful*. This thought . . . is in sharp contrast to the 'dogmatic' conception of truth as a fixed, static transcription of an impersonal reality external to man, a reality in which man is shorn of any active role" (E. A. Tiryakina, *Sociologism and Existentialism: Two Perspectives on the Individual and Society* [Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1962], p. 158).

There is another way by which this interplay of subject and object can influence, if not define, the product of engineering research. If we take a historical perspective, we see that developments in engineering science proceed as the artifacts, the technology to which the science applies, proceed to improve and become more sophisticated. The manufactured world ever presents a new reality to the engineer. As technological developments accumulate, new concepts and principles as well as methods become thinkable. For example, the principle of continuity of displacement, in the development of the engineering science which applies to the behavior of structures, had to await the availability of materials uniform in their nature, of consistent and reliable ways of fabricating and of assembling structural elements into a whole. Before the last half of the nineteenth century, the principles of force and moment equilibrium were the lone pillars of, confessing the anachronism, the engineering science of structures. Only "statically determinate" structures could be analyzed. Would it be correct, then, to say that the engineering science of structures was incomplete or – stronger still – in error, not true, before then? If we take utility as a criterion of truth, we respond negatively.

Some claim that, because their motivation (and rewards) and subject matter differ, engineers think in ways different from those of scientists. Walter Vincenti presents a compelling argument for such a difference in his history of the development of a particular perspective and method used so effectively in the analysis of problems in thermodynamics and in fluid flow, namely "Control-Volume Analysis." The use of a control volume enables the engineer to ignore the details of what goes on within the control surface yet still obtain useful results:

engineers frequently must deal with flow problems so complex that the underlying physics is not completely understood. . . . In such situations control-volume analysis, by working with information only on boundaries and ignoring the interior physics, can often supply limited but highly useful results of an overall nature.

> (W. G. Vincenti, "Control-Volume Analysis: A Difference in Thinking between Engineering and Physics," *Technology and Culture*, 23, 2 [1982], p. 150)

But note that here, too, the usefulness of the method depends upon the ability of the engineer to arrange and manipulate the object in the study of the phenomenon – whether the drag on an airfoil, or the efficiency of a triple-expansion reciprocating steam engine – such that certain conditions are met – e.g. steady flow, no separation, the internal machinery behaves in accord with its design – or at least approximately satisfied.

We see there are significant differences in the interests, the ways and objects of thought, and the methods of engineers as researchers and those of scientists. But from another, social/political perspective they look very much the same. Like scientists, engineers apply to the National Science Foundation, or another government agency, for grants to support their research. They employ graduate students as assistants who, upon completion of their research, are awarded an advanced degree. The result of their research is published in scholarly journals and available to the world. They work unfettered, for the most part, by the immediate needs of industry – though this is changing as government support of research in some domains of engineering science dwindles and industrial support increases. And younger faculty in engineering seeking tenure recognize that the most important factor weighed in the tenure-granting and promotion process is the number and significance of their research publications – just as it is for their peers in the science departments at the university.

Finally we note that, like the scientist, the engineer engaged in research will make heavy use of mathematics in the representation of phenomena and in the processing of experimental data. A good bit of research in engineering science is directed at the development of mathematical methods albeit for the solution of practical problems: e.g. finite element methods in continuum mechanics. There is a strong tie between engineering science and applied mathematics, a tie reflected in the existence of university departments labeled as such.

The similarities suggest that another comparison might illuminate the engineering sciences. Normally – and it has been the case here – the comparison is made with science. What if we turn the tables and explore how engineering science differs from, or is like, engineering? (By that I mean engineering practice.)

The first thing to note is the different degree requirements for doing engineering science and entering engineering practice. The latter requires but a bachelor's degree (or a three-year, two-year, bachelor's, then master's, degree in accord with the Bologna recommendations). To do engineering science requires a PhD – as in science.

A second thing to note is the context of use of the results of their respective efforts. Engineers working, usually in a team, on a product for the mass market, a facility for the general public, or a system for managing the flow of information over a network, etc., face significant uncertainties about how the object of their design will be handled, used or misused. The engineering scientist, on the other hand, like the scientist can control the context of use, out on the road as well as in the lab.

Another significant difference is that the engineer designing generally works as a member of a team whose other members have different interests, competencies and responsibilities. Designing is a polyvalent process or multi-paradigmatic process. Research in engineering science may also be done in teams; but ordinarily, and like research in science, participants in the project work within a single paradigm. The engineer as scientist need only be concerned with one knowledge domain.

We might conclude that engineering science is more like science than it is like engineering! Indeed, there are those who claim that the emphasis on engineering science as knowledge within the undergraduate curriculum is excessive. While all will agree that learning the "fundamentals" of (some) engineering science is essential and necessary to qualify as a professional engineer, that form of learning is never sufficient.
