---
images: []
order: 45
title: 3. Empirical Studies
---

First initiatives to study the nature of technological knowledge were not taken by philosophers, not even in the philosophy of technology, but by historians of technology. A harvest of historical studies up to 1980 was made by Staudenmaier. Based on a survey of articles in the journal *Technology and Culture*, he claimed that technological knowledge does indeed comprise concepts that have been derived from science, but also that it contains a lot more. This includes empirical data specific for technology (data which are not just instrumental for the development of scientific theories), technological theories and technological know-how (or skills). So one of the first things these historians derived from their historical accounts is that technology cannot be accounted for adequately by the "applied science" hypothesis. One of the first philosophers to recognize the distinct nature of technological knowledge was Alexandre Koyré. He called technology not just a set of techniques, but a "system of thought, based on common sense", which does not depend on science but is influenced by it indirectly. He also emphasized that, in order to be useful for engineers, scientific knowledge needs to go through a certain transformation. He was quoted in an article by Layton (1974), who identified *design* as a "common denominator" for technological knowledge.

Later historical studies into the nature of technological nature have followed that vein, and as a result insights were gained primarily by studying processes of invention and design, rather than production. Vincenti (1990) conducted a series of case studies in the field of aeronautical engineering. He identified six types of knowledge that engineers had used. These types are: fundamental design concepts (e.g. knowing the basic components of a car), design criteria and specifications (e.g. knowing that interfaces need to be understandable for users), theoretical tools (e.g. calculation methods

for forces in a construction), quantitative data (e.g. the strength of a material), practical considerations (e.g. knowing how to strike a balance between costs and safety) and design instrumentalities (e.g. knowing how to trace the cause of a failure in an efficient way). He also listed six types of knowledge-generating activities in engineering: transfer from science, invention, theoretical and experimental engineering research, design practice, production and direct trial. Faulkner (1994) extended the analysis and developed a typology of technological knowledge by studying industrial innovations. She came up with the following types: knowledge related to the natural world, to design practice, to experimental R&D, related to final products, and related to finding new knowledge. Altogether it can be concluded that not much substantial has been written since Vincenti's study in 1990.

### 4. Philosophical Explorations

The historical studies mentioned above made sense to philosophers (see, e.g., Ropohl 1997 and Pitt 2001 for a response to Vincenti's taxonomy), but the way they were derived from case studies was seen as fairly ad hoc. It was acknowledged that a more systematic approach is needed and that these reflections have to be integrated in philosophical debates. One such debate is about the question whether or not technology can indeed be described as only "applied natural science." Two characteristics of technology challenge this idea: collectivity and context-dependentness.
