---
images: []
order: 49
title: BART GREMMEN
---

Until the 1970s the debate on the science–technology relationship was dominated by theoretical issues from the philosophy of science. The history of technology had limited theoretical import, and sociology of technology was almost nonexistent. The development of both of these disciplines led to criticism of the subsumption schema (the domination of science over technology), and to the rise of the so-called interaction schema as an alternative schema. Although the interplay model belongs to the interaction schema, the interaction between scientific and technical practices is considered to be more than just a simple exchange of results between practices. Both kinds of practices are changed in some manner, yet each also maintains its uniqueness and integrity.

In 1965, Derek de Solla Price formulated one of the first versions of the interaction schema: science and technology as relatively independent but closely interacting activities. This interactive schema of the science–technology relationship must be seen, according to Barnes, as a major reorientation in our thinking about the science– technology relationship. We have to recognize science and technology to be on a par with each other. The interaction model is a model that captures much of current thinking; and, following Barnes, we can identify two necessary developments for the emergence of the interactive model. First, the recognition of science and technology as being forms of culture: new science developing from old science and new technology from old technology. Second, the acceptation that knowledge does not have inherent implications: it is not possible to trace a technological innovation backwards and to make it out as a logical consequence of the newest scientific theory or discovery encountered in the line of its development. In the interaction schema the interpenetration between science and technology has become an important aspect of their interaction.

Science and technology are enmeshed in a symbiotic relationship – a weak, mutually beneficial interaction. Science as one context of inventive activity (an activity which by its nature demands evaluation in relation to human objectives) may readily become conditioned by criteria from the technology, the other context, and vice versa. Different models are developed to provide a more detailed description of the nature of this interaction process. Rip developed one such model, using the metaphor of dancing partners to describe the science and technology relationship. He looks at science and technology as ongoing processes with interactions that cluster in various ways and are

#### bart gremmen

labelled "science" and "technology," also in a variety of ways. In this respect he wants to add, in a threefold way, to the analysis of de Solla Price, who tended to look at science and technology as separate, unified wholes. In the first place Rip argues that there is a certain mutual adaptation and division of labor between science and technology, created in particular historical circumstances and made possible by particular "cognitive infrastructures." In the second place economic and strategic considerations come in after science and technology have not only produced their products but are part and parcel of the production process. Third, it must be possible to trace changes in the relations between science and technology, transformations even, in the past and in the present. Rip argues that a new kind of intertwining of science and technology is occurring, as part of a conscious, strategic mobilization of cognitive-technical potential.

Productive interplay between technical and scientific practices requires in any case the creation by one or more of the involved practices of an "interface." An interface is the means by which interplay (i.e. ongoing interaction) is effected at the place where multiple intersections of different practices occur. A "broker practice" is a main interface between scientific and technical practices. As a practice in its own right it mediates between technical and scientific practices. In order to "get off the ground," there must be mobilization of interest and resources. Thus, a broker practice resembles a situation in which large numbers of people, laboratories and organizations rapidly commit their resources to one approach to a problem (what Fujimura calls a "bandwagon"). For example: combinations of problem and data representations, methods, and theory. In the case of bandwagons, the emphasis may be on its temporary character, a passing fad even.

A more permanent "broker" practice is a practical science. The practical sciences are a group of academic disciplines that provide the engineer with the knowledge necessary for the production and use of certain material objects. Practical scientists work on the following problems: prognosis of the behavior of a projected functional object, prognosis of the results of a projected procedure, determination of the structure and composition of a functional object necessary for a certain intended behavior, and determination of the procedures one should follow in order to achieve an intended effect. The solution to the question of how to manufacture something is not identical to the act of manufacturing. The development of new procedures and functional objects has become a specialized systematic activity. The point of practical research is, however, the bringing about of events and processes. Practical science relates to the activities of designers, engineers, technicians and production workers, and also concerns the users and consumers of whatever is produced.

In the debates on the science–technology relationship the interplay model is a kind of interaction model. We can summarize the philosophical basis of the interplay model in three points:

- 1. External influences on a practice are results of the interaction between practices. This interaction is seldom a one-way influence; the practices involved are changed in the interaction.
- 2. There are no hierarchically dominant practices in a strict sense.
- 3. Innovation in practices does not derive from scientific discovery, as it were in a linear sequence.

### References and Further Reading

- Barnes, B. (1974). *Scientific Knowledge and Sociological Theory* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul). Fujimura, J. (1992). "Crafting Science: Standardized Packages, Boundary Objects, and 'Translation'," in Pickering (1992).
- Gremmen, B. (1993). "The Mystery of the Practical Use of Scientific Knowledge," PhD dissertation, University of Twente.
- Latour, B. (1987). *Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society* (Milton Keynes/Cambridge, Mass.: Open University Press/Harvard University Press).
- Price, D. J. de Solla (1965). "Is Technology Historically Independent of Science? A Study in Statistical Historiography," *Technology and Culture*, 6: 553–68.
- Rip, A. (1992), "Science and Technology as Dancing Partners," in P. Kroes and M. Bakker (eds), *Technological Development and Science in the Industrial Age*, pp. 231–70.
