---
images: []
order: 50
title: 1. Science and Technology
---

At present, many accept that modern science and technology are interwoven into a complex that is sometimes called "technoscience": the progress of science is dependent on the sophistication of instrumentation, whereas the progress of "high-tech" instruments and apparatus is dependent on scientific research (see Galison 1987, 1997; Baird and Faust 1990; Radder 1996, 2003). From this perspective, an understanding of *how* scientific research interacts with technology, in particular in the development of instruments and apparatus, is a topic for both philosophy of technology and philosophy of science. The focus taken here is *how* scientific research *contributes* to the development of instruments and apparatus for technological use.

In philosophy of technology, recent interest has been in the nature of *technological knowledge* (e.g. Vincenti 1990; Kroes 1995; Pitt 2000), rather than in *how* scientific research contributes to technological development. In that literature, science is valued for its heuristic role, whereas scientific approaches to the development of technology are nonexistent. Conceptual and historical reasons may explain this focus. Traditionally, science and technology were distinct domains. The classical dichotomy between scientific knowledge (*episteme*) and technological knowledge (*techne*) was grounded in the ontological distinction between their objects: scientific knowledge is about "things" that exist of necessity, things that are universal, eternal, ungenerated and imperishable; technological knowledge is about things that have their origin in their maker, "things" that are variable, generated and perishable. This dichotomy has caused conceptual confusion when trying to understand the relation between science and technology in modern scientific practices. Mario Bunge (1966) put forward the thesis that "technology is applied science." What he meant to say is that in technology the method and the theories of science are applied to solving practical problems. An outcome of this scientific approach is technological knowledge, which is made up of theories, grounded rules, and data. This thesis – and its implicit implication, which is that technology *results* from science – has been much debated in philosophy of technology of the 1970s and 1980s. It was rejected on the basis of conceptual analyses of scientific and technological knowledge (e.g. Skolimowski 1966). But also historical studies showed that the factual contribution of science to new technologies in the past

was less significant than many seemed to believe. Most technological devices were developed by craftsmen, independent of science. Engineers did not need a scientific understanding of the phenomena they utilized and of the technological devices they invented. For development and design they used phenomenological laws and "rules of thumb" (see Layton 1974).
