---
images: []
order: 53
title: 4. Instruments in Scientific Practice
---

Several authors have defended that the theory-ladenness problem of instruments can be excluded in some cases. A favored example is observations by means of microscopes and other instruments with which objects can be made visible (e.g. Hacking 1983; Zik 2001; Chalmers 2003). This also holds for *data*. Data given by instruments – such as data produced by a conductivity meter – may be given independent of a theory. Instruments create an invariant relationship between their operations and the world. After a change in theory, it will continue to show the same reading. However, the *meanings of data* – such as superconductivity – are not given by the data, since the data are interpreted as a *phenomenon* by theories. Thus, although data have an internal stability, which results from being reproducible by instruments, their meaning is neither manifest nor stable (e.g. Ackermann 1985; Gooding 1990). In particular in exploratory experiments it requires the formation of *new basic concepts*, such as the notion of a current circuit in the case of Ampère, before the data produced by the instrument can be interpreted as a phenomenon (e.g. Harré 1998; Steinle 2002; Heidelberger 2003).

Nevertheless, the view that data produced by instruments are independent of theory has also been challenged. Even the most basic "data-generating" instruments,

such as thermometers, have gone through a long, intellectually and experimentally challenging route to knowing that these instruments tell us the temperature correctly. Finding empirical knowledge of temperature involved theoretical assumptions about the properties of matter. Therefore, a basic problem for a philosophical account of empirical science, which demands that theories should be justified by observations, is that observations involve theories, for instance about how things work (e.g. Chang 2004).

This latter finding also holds for other instruments and apparatus that inhabit our laboratories. According to Nancy Cartwright, such instruments are to be understood as *nomological machines*. A nomological machine is a fixed arrangement of components, or factors, with stable capacities that in the right sort of stable environment will give rise to regular behavior. Laws represent this regular behavior of nomological machines, which implies that those laws hold as a consequence of the repeated, successful operation of nomological machines. Therefore, laws – understood as a necessary regular association between properties – do not necessarily hold for the world beyond the nomological machine (Cartwright 1983, 1989, 1999, and also Harré 2003; additionally, important articles on the role of instruments in scientific practice are in Radder 2003; see also Boon 2004).

What these examples illustrate is that, in scientific practice, theories and instruments are developed in a mutual relationship. Rather than being spectacles on the world, instruments take part in our theoretical knowledge. This has been well expressed by Hacking (1992), who claims that our preserved theories and the world fit together, less because we have found out how the world is than because we have tailored each to the other. As a laboratory-science matures, it develops a body of types of theories and types of instruments and types of analysis of data that are mutually adjusted to each other. Any test of theory is related to instruments that have evolved in conjunction with it – and in conjunction with modes of data analysis. Conversely, the criteria for the working of the instruments and for the correctness of analyses are precisely the fit with theory. Thus, contrary to the Duhem–Quine thesis that theory is underdetermined by data, Hacking argues that the constraints by these interrelated elements narrow the degrees of freedom for finding adequate theories.
