---
images: []
order: 56
title: Preamble
---

The study of the "social construction of science" refers to the analysis of social influences on the content of scientific knowledge. That there are social influences on what we count as knowledge is an old idea, most closely associated with Karl Mannheim whose writings gave rise to the subject "sociology of knowledge." Quite simply, what people in different societies count as truth varies from society to society. What you believe depends on where you were born and how you were brought up. For example, it is impossible for an inhabitant of an Amazonian tribe to count it as true that market economies are better than command economies just as it is impossible for a Western economist to count certain complex claims about witches and spirits (I do not know how to say what they are) to be true. If you have not encountered the "knowledge," then it cannot be part of your universe.

So far, so incontestable, but things get a bit more tricky as we come closer to home. If I am brought up in a Catholic community of Northern Ireland, I am likely to become a Catholic and believe that the wine turns to blood during the mass. If I am brought up in a Protestant community in the same country, I am likely to believe that the idea of the "change" is symbolic rather than real. Here two groups know about each other's beliefs, and so it is less obvious that they must be bound by upbringing. And, indeed, some people change their beliefs. Still, most people do not change their fundamental religious and political beliefs, and the sociology of knowledge is well supported by such statistics – what people believe is strongly associated with their upbringing.

Talking about that impressive statistic can cause trouble. Though the believers are sure they believe what they believe because it is true, the statistics tend to suggest that for most people it is more a matter of accident of birth. Nevertheless, for the true believer, the statistic presents no deep problem – it is just that some were "chosen" or fortunate enough to be born in the right circumstances and some in the wrong circumstances. You think you are among the lucky ones; that the other group thinks it is they who are lucky and you who are unlucky is their problem. Furthermore, any doubts can be resolved by experience – the experience of revelation that accompanies true faith. On the other hand, sociologists and the like, who are sufficiently impressed by the statistics to believe that faith is causally linked to location in society, and who find it indicative that personal revelation can confirm even the details of historically situated collective practices and institutions, are likely to attract the wrath of all because they appear to be casting doubt on all faiths.

When we come still closer to home the danger becomes manifest. Consider those who believe in the truths of science. They are well aware that others do not believe in those truths, but just like the faithful they consider these others to be simply less fortunate than themselves. Again, doubts can be dispelled by reflecting on experience, this time, not of revelation, but of repeated experiment and the force of theoretical deduction. Those who believe in science have a systematic method for arriving at the truth which is said to be independent of accidents of birth. But actually it is the religiously faithful who have the advantage here because anyone can open their soul to revelation. To test the truth of a scientific claim is almost impossible for all but a very small elite. It is one of the strangest facts about science that the belief that anyone can test a scientific claim remains robust in the face of the fact that hardly anyone can or has. For example, who has ever tried one of the tests of relativity or confirmed the observation of the W-Boson? In fact, different beliefs about the nature of the physical world persist even among different groups of scientists for decade after decade. It becomes clear that, first, there is ample logical space for a sociology of scientific knowledge and, second, that those who practice it are likely to be thought to be questioning the truths of science and find themselves the subject of attacks such as are more typically directed at religious heretics than at scholars. There was even a period, in the 1990s, which became known as the "science wars" because of the tenor of the attacks on sociologists of scientific knowledge by certain natural scientists.

When we turn to those who actually engage in the sociology of scientific knowledge we find a wide spectrum of positions, many of which are not at all critical of science even though they involve a reassessment of the way science works which sometimes departs from models dear to scientists. Admittedly, there are those who claim that because Western science is just one belief among many it follows that, for example, Western-style medicine should not be brought to societies with radically different beliefs. There are also those who stress the "interest-based" component of the social influence on knowledge and take it to justify a generalized anti-Western-science stance, or an opposition to white-male-dominated science. There are others who use the ideas of the sociology of scientific knowledge to found a distrust of a science-based capitalism as a whole and/or the effect of industrialization on the environment. In general, these critics are not found among the small group who study science closely. Most of the members of the latter group claim that the social analysis of scientific knowledge does not imply a questioning of that knowledge. For example, the group based in Edinburgh and associated with what is known as "the strong programme" insist that their concern is the way social forces contribute to the content of all scientific knowledge claims. They insist that these can be found at work in all such claims, both those which we treat as true as well as those which we treat as false, so that being affected by social forces is not to be equated with doubts about validity. It has to be said, however – and this is merely a statement of the fact – that more than thirty years on from the initial statement of the strong programme position there are still critics who are failing to make complete sense of this claim.

One way to go forward is to look at examples of practice. We can all agree that scientific knowledge is affected by social forces to at least some extent even if only in

the short term. If we want to study those social forces, it is sensible to concentrate on them alone. The duty of the sociologist is clear: one should concentrate on the social causes of belief in "p" and cease to argue or worry about whether belief in "p" has anything to do with the truth of "p." Thus, suppose I want to study the social forces that helped or hindered the acceptance of the theory of relativity. To do it well, I should assume that the truth or otherwise of the theory of relativity had no effect on its acceptance. To take the truth of the theory as a causal contributor to its acceptance can only divert attention from the social processes I am trying to understand; to press the social analysis to its limits, it is vital not to cut it off prematurely by saying that things just "had to come out this way because the theory is true." Whether or not the theory is true, the crucial point is to look at the social forces involved in bringing people to believe it was true; the analysis should be no different in the case of relativity than in the case of, say, astrology. No philosophical commitment to the truth or otherwise of science is required to adopt this methodological stance – it is known as methodological relativism. This approach is not dissimilar to agnosticism as a prescription for doing science itself. If, as a scientist, one wants to understand, say, what caused the fundamental constants to have the particular values that enabled life to exist, one must ignore claims or arguments along the lines "God made it thus," and get on with looking for physical causes.

The actual analysis of how facts and theories come to be believed can be conducted at a variety of levels. Thomas Kuhn's influential book *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions* pointed out the way that whole communities of science would sometimes become caught up in shifting-fashion-like switches of view – analogous with "gestalt switches" in psychology. After a gestalt switch, the same data from the same experiment or observation can be seen as pointing to quite different conclusions. A "paradigm revolution," as Kuhn called such changes, is a social phenomenon. It ought to be mentioned that many of Kuhn's ideas about how the same facts and observations can be consistent with different theories were worked out much earlier by the medical researcher Ludwik Fleck, reflecting on his own practice in the study of syphilis. The later ideas of the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein can also be taken to give a more detailed underpinning to the notion that what we take to be the logical compulsion of rules of action and analysis are really matters of social convention within a "form-oflife" – a matter of certain "ways of going on" being "taken for granted."

An example of a much more detailed analysis that follows through the implication of such philosophical ideas is the examination of the actual process of checking of scientific results by replication of experiments. "Believers" in scientific method often cite replication as one of the crucial differences between science and other kinds of belief – anyone, from anywhere, who checks the results of a scientific experiment will get the same result, so experimentally determined facts stand outside society. It has already been mentioned that experiments are expensive to carry out, so the "anyone" in "anyone can check" is often a very small number of people. For most of us, including scientists, belief that the checks have been carried out and have confirmed the initial claims depends on assessing the credibility of the small number of replicators and the reliability of the media through which the results are conveyed to a wider audience. Obviously, these assessments depend upon wider assumptions about how society works – most of us would make different assumptions if the claims

concerned witchcraft, magic, or even experimental results concerning, say, paranormal phenomena.

That is what happens "at best." Often, however, even the members of the elite group who have the means to test an experimental claim find themselves in dispute. Under these circumstances the social components intrinsic to the very process of replication become clear. Thus, it is not enough to have the logistic resources required to repeat an experiment; one must also have the necessary skills to do it. To some extent, skills turn on "tacit knowledge" that cannot be expressed. Therefore, if someone fails to confirm an experimental result, it may not be that the result was wrong – they may not have possessed the necessary skills. The only clear way to find out if the necessary skills are in play is to see if the experiment "works," but what it is to "work" is usually the subject of the dispute – e.g. should a working gravitational wave detector of a certain sensitivity see gravitational waves or should it not see them? The experimenters find themselves caught in the "experimenter's regress": to know if an experiment has been soundly performed, one has to show it has the right outcome, but to know what the right outcome should be one must first conduct a series of sound experiments. Disputes of this kind are settled by agreements to agree on what count as the sound experiments; and this, again, turns on judgments of credibility and so forth – these are sociologically analysable processes.

### References and Further Reading

Bloor, D. (1976). *Knowledge and Social Imagery* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul); 2nd edn (1991) (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).

Collins, H. M. (1985). *Changing Order: Replication and Induction in Scientific Practice* (London/Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage); 2nd edn (1992) (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).

Collins, H. M. and Pinch, T. J. (1993). *The Golem: What Everyone Should Know about Science* (Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press). New edn 1998.

Fleck, L. (1935/1979). *Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press). First published in German in 1935.

Knorr-Cetina, K. (1981). *The Manufacture of Knowledge* (Oxford: Pergamon).

Kuhn, T. S. (1962). *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press). Labinger, J. and Collins, H. (2001). *The One Culture?: A Conversation about Science* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).

Latour, B. and Woolgar, S. (1979). *Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of Scientific Facts* (London/Beverly Hills: Sage).
