---
images: []
order: 61
title: The Origin and Development of the Social Construction of Technology
---

The social construction of technology (SCOT) grew out of the combination of three distinct bodies of work: the science–technology–society (STS) movement, the sociology of scientific knowledge and the history of technology. The first started in the 1970s, mainly in the Netherlands, Scandinavia, the United Kingdom and the United States. Its goal was to enrich the curricula of both universities and secondary schools by studying issues such as scientists' social responsibilities, the risks of nuclear energy, the proliferation of nuclear arms, and environmental pollution. The movement was quite successful, especially in science and engineering faculties, and some of the STS courses became part of the degree requirements. The sociology of scientific knowledge (SSK) emerged in the late 1970s in the United Kingdom on the basis of work in the sociology of knowledge, the philosophy of science and the sociology of science. The central methodological tenets of the strong programme (especially its symmetry principle) seemed equally applicable to technology. In the history of technology, especially in the US, an increasing number of scholars began to raise more theoretical and sociologically inspired questions (influential were Constant [1980], Hughes [1983] and Cowan [1983]). Path-breaking advocacy for this body of work in the history of technology provided the reader edited by MacKenzie and Wajcman (1985). Researchers from these three traditions convened in an international workshop in 1984 in the Netherlands. The subsequent volume from that workshop, edited by an STS-er, a historian of technology and a sociologist of scientific knowledge (Bijker et al. 1987), has been heralded as the starting-point of the social construction of technology.

Additionally, it is important to recognize that the social construction of technology developed like any normal scientific program: its agenda, central concepts, and even unit of analysis shifted in response to research findings and discussions among scholars. In that sense, one can distinguish early and late (or recent) versions of the social construction of technology.

An important starting-point for the social construction of technology was to criticize technological determinism. Technological determinism was taken to comprise two elements: (1) technology develops autonomously, and (2) technology determines to an important degree societal development. This view was seen as intellectually poor and politically debilitating. Technological determinism implies a poor research strategy, it was argued, because it entails a teleological, linear and one-dimensional view of technological development. And it was considered politically debilitating because technological determinism suggests that social and political interventions in the course of technology are impossible, thus making politicization (see below) of technology a futile endeavor. To bolster this critique on technological determinism, it was necessary to show that the working of technology was socially constructed – with the emphasis on *social*. Key concepts in this program, as will be discussed in the next section, were "relevant social group," "interpretive flexibility," and "closure" and "stabilization." The unit of analysis was the single artifact. The choice for the artifact as unit of analysis was a choice for the "hardest possible case." To show that even the working of a bicycle or a lamp was socially constructed seemed a harder task, and thus

– when successful – more convincing, than to argue that technology at a higher level of aggregation was socially shaped.

The agenda of demonstrating the social construction of artifacts by an analysis on a micro level resulted in a wealth of case studies. A few years later, the program was broadened in two ways (Bijker and Law 1992). First, questions were raised at a meso and macro level of aggregation as well – for example about the political construction of radioactive waste, clinical budgeting in the British National Health Service, or technically mediated social order. Second, the agenda was broadened to include again the issue of technology's impact on society, which had been bracketed for the sake of fighting technological determinism. Concepts developed for this agenda were "technological frame," and various conceptualizations of the obduracy of technology (Hommels 2005). The unit of analysis was broadened from the singular technical artifact to the more comprehensive and heterogeneous sociotechnical ensemble. The emphasis now was on *construction* rather than on *social*.

Present research in the social construction of technology combines ongoing empirical case studies with more general questions about modernization of society, politicization of technological culture, and management of innovation. It now becomes increasingly difficult (and unfruitful) to observe the boundaries between the various approaches within the broader social construction of technology: research collaboration and conceptual combinations emerge between, for example, the actor-network approach, the social construction of technology (in the narrow sense), and gender and technology studies.
