---
images: []
order: 62
title: The Social Construction of Technology as a Heuristics for Research
---

As a heuristics for studying technology in society, the social construction of technology can be laid out in three consecutive research steps (Bijker 1995).

Key concepts in the first step are "relevant social group" and "interpretive flexibility." An artifact is described through the eyes of relevant social groups. Social groups are relevant for describing an artifact when they explicitly attribute a meaning to that artifact. Thus, relevant social groups can be identified by looking for actors who mention the artifact in the same way. For describing the high-wheeled Ordinary bicycle in the 1870s, such groups were, for example, bicycle producers, young athletic Ordinary users, women cyclists, and anti-cyclists. Because the description of an artifact through the eyes of different relevant social groups produces different descriptions – and thus different artifacts – this results in the researcher's demonstrating the "interpretive flexibility" of the artifact. There is not one artifact; there are many. In the case of the Ordinary bicycle: there was the Unsafe machine (through the eyes of women) and there was the Macho machine (through the eyes of the young male Ordinary users). For women, the bicycle was a machine in which your skirt got entangled and from which you frequently made a steep fall; for the "young men of means and nerve" riding it, the bicycle was a machine with which to impress a lady.

In the second step, the researcher follows how the interpretive flexibility diminishes, because some artifacts gain dominance over the others and meanings converge – and, in the end, one artifact results from this process of social construction. Here, key concepts are "closure" and "stabilization." Both concepts are meant to describe the result of the process of social construction. "Stabilization" stresses the process character: a process of social construction can take several years in which the degree of stabilization slowly increases up to the moment of closure. "Closure," stemming from SSK, highlights the irreversible end point of a discordant process in which several artifacts existed next to each other.

In the third step, the processes of stabilization that have been described in the second step are analyzed and explained by interpreting them in a broader theoretical framework: why does a social construction process follow this way, rather than that? The central concept here is "technological frame." A technological frame structures the interactions among the members of a relevant social group, and shapes their thinking and acting. It is similar to Kuhn's concept "paradigm" with one important difference: "technological frame" is a concept to be applied to all kinds of relevant social groups, while "paradigm" was exclusively intended for scientific communities.

This three-step research process thus amounts to: (1) sociological deconstruction of an artifact to demonstrate its interpretive flexibility; (2) description of the artifact's social construction; and (3) explanation of this construction process in terms of the technological frames of relevant social groups.
