---
images: []
order: 67
title: Preamble
---

Philosophical theories of scientific change have tended to ignore the role of instruments and the impact of innovation in instrumentation on theory change. What are often referred to as the "standard" theories, those of Thomas Kuhn, Imre Lakatos and Larry Laudan, with their focus on theory, concentrate primarily on abstract considerations. These include such factors as anomalies (Kuhn), degenerating research programs (Lakatos) and problem-solving ability (Laudan). However, in none of these cases is attention paid to the mechanics behind change. Thus, we are informed that over time paradigms accumulate anomalies, but how these occur is not explained. Research programs degenerate, but what are the specific causes of degeneration? And what exactly contributes to the problem-solving ability of theories? One clear answer is "instruments."

Instruments contribute to theory change in different ways. Thus, it would be incorrect to propose a single theory regarding how instruments are involved in theory change. Part of the issue here is that theories change in a variety of ways and under multiple circumstances. Thus, one would expect that instruments would also be involved in those changes is a myriad of ways. But there is one constant: if science is what scientists do, then instruments change the way scientists work. So the focus here is on how instruments change science, rather than on theory change *per se.*

Consider just a few of the ways that instruments are involved in scientific change. New instruments can make possible new observations that place the status of a current theory in doubt. New instruments can stimulate the development of new sciences. Instruments developed in the context of one science can be imported into a science providing the impetus for a variety of changes. And, finally, devices developed for use outside the sciences can be incorporated into scientific work in ways that amount to a massive shift in how science is done or, rather, in what scientists do.

An episode in the history of science that vividly illustrates one role instruments play in theory change concerns Galileo's telescope. Galileo did not invent the telescope, but he was the first to put it to scientific use. In 1609 he published *Siderius nuntius.* It contained the results of his telescopic observations of the Moon. According to the then current theory of the structure and nature of the universe, the Moon, as a celestial body, was perfect – it was smooth and without blemish, as were all the bodies of the heavens. Claims such as these were part of the geocentric theory elaborated by Aristotle that

proposed that, while the earth was a body that experienced constant change, the heavens did not. Galileo's reported observations showed that, contrary to what Aristotle proposed, the Moon was not a perfect sphere – it contained mountains and craters. Other observations included the revelation that Jupiter had moons. This dealt a heavy blow to the Aristotelian claim that there was one center to the universe, Earth, and that all other celestial bodies revolved around it. It now seems that there were many "centers" if Jupiter had moons. In short, the geocentric theory was in serious trouble. It is not too much to claim that Galileo's telescopic observations were highly instrumental in the final rejection of Aristotelian theory and its eventual replacement by Newton's account.

In the standard accounts of theory change we shall find acknowledgment of the observations, but not of the key role of the instrument, the telescope, that made those observations possible. And, more to the point, there is no understanding, in the standard accounts, of the role instruments play in changing not just the science but also our understanding of the world of experience. That is, of the kind of experiences we can have. Kuhn alludes to the world changing when paradigms change, but does little to elaborate. But it is clear that, following Galileo's discoveries regarding the Moon and Jupiter, the potential for human experience changed. That is, there is a very real sense in which the very meaning of "observation" changed, because the instrument made it possible to see things that hitherto it had not been possible to see.

Another instrument that influenced not only the development of science, in this case biology, was the microscope. But the role it played in theory change was different from that of the telescope. Rather than playing a key role in replacing a major entrenched theory, it was, to put it strongly, responsible for the creation of not just a new theory, cell theory, but a whole new science. The microscope emerged in the early decades of the seventeenth century. Galileo made one, Leeuwenhoek reported numerous microscopic observations, as did Robert Hooke, whose *Micrographia* was the first textbook of microscopy. Like the telescope, the microscope made it possible to see what we could not have seen before. In the early years, however, it was not clear what was being observed. New vocabularies were invented to try to give some structure to this new microscopic world that was being opened up. For example, Leeuwenhoek spoke of "animalculus," and Hooke invented the term "cell." But what actually was going on in the arena of the very small was unclear because there was no theory of the very small. What were these things, and why did they do what they did?

It took another two centuries before a systematic response to these questions was formulated in cell theory. In the intervening years improvements to the instrument had been made, and many speculated on what was going on at the microscopic level. The main impetus for the development of cell theory came from efforts to understand the causes of human disease. Attempts to use the microscope to understand the makeup of human organs proved unfruitful because no one was clear about what they were seeing. In some respects these problems echoed Hooke's complaints. The common thread running through them could only be answered by the development of staining techniques, which in turn could only follow from a theory of the cell finally articulated by Theodor Schwann and Mithias Jacob Schleiden around 1839. So in this case we have the development of an instrument that stimulates the search for theory to explain what the instrument reveals. And, like the telescope, the more useful the microscope became in revealing the world of the very small, so, too, did there occur changes in what we understood to count as an observation.

There are numerous cases where devices developed outside the contexts of science are imported into a science with astonishing results. The photograph is one such example. Today, in astronomy, the photograph has become an essential component in the doing of science. Using a telescope is in itself a complicated business. To begin with, since the Earth moves at a different rate from that of the heavens, keeping a telescope aligned with the object of study is a major problem. When Galileo was making a record of what he saw on the surface of the Moon he would have to stop his observing and turn to the parchment on which he was sketching his observations, then turn back, only to find that the Moon was no longer in the same place. He would then have to resight his telescope and make sure he had properly sketched the surface and then turn back and realign the telescope again. Today it is possible to attach a camera to a home telescope that has a built-in tracking device that keeps it aligned with the object of study and to take pictures of it, preserving the moment for later study. The Hubble Space Telescope has entertained the world with the pictures it has taken of deep-space phenomena in addition to providing the astronomical community with detailed images the analysis of which is changing our understanding of the expanding universe. In short, in astronomy, the camera (in some form or other) has become an instrument of science.

Finally we turn to a device that has transformed the face of many sciences, but in particular of space science: the computer. The computer plays increasingly important roles in nuclear physics, mathematics, statistics, sociology, astronomy, space science – and the list goes on. Interestingly, it plays different roles, and they have to be carefully delineated. Here we shall concentrate on nuclear physics and space science.

From the beginning of the hydrogen bomb project in the United States, the computer has been an integral part of the development of nuclear physics. At first it was used to assist in making calculations to predict reaction times. It was not essential to that job, since the Soviet Union used batteries of mainly women with hand calculators to achieve the same result. But it is increasingly essential today. For those countries that are signatories to and abide by the conventions of the anti-nuclear proliferation treaty, the computer has become the means by which to continue development of our knowledge in this area through the use of simulations. Simulations are important not only for the purpose of designing newer generations of nuclear weapons, but also for the development of new nuclear energy plants and for tracking the deterioration of existing nuclear warheads.

However crucial computers are to nuclear developments, it is safe to say that space science would not exist without them. Space science involves more than astronomy and cosmology. It involves chemistry and geology and biology, and it increasingly relies on information-gathering by mechanical probes sent off to various planetary and celestial locations. And the computer is involved in virtually all stages. Consider the following scenario. NASA sent a probe, appropriately named Galileo, to Jupiter and put it into orbit around the planet. To accomplish that simple act, scientists and engineers on Earth had to communicate with the probe, telling it when to do the appropriate maneuvers needed to achieve orbit. Essentially, they were communicating with a computer program. When the Galileo probe's "cameras" took pictures of the surface

of Jupiter's moon Io, it was essentially storing digital data governed by computers. When it sent that data back to Earth, the computers on board aligned the antenna with earth and then sent the data, to be recovered and transformed into "pictures" by computer programs. Likewise for the pictures we now have of the surface of Mars. From the construction of the probe, to its launch, to its arrival at its destination, to the acquisition of data and their return to Earth and reconstitution, computers are integral.

In a similar fashion, computers are an essential feature of nano-science. This is a science that relies heavily on an array of electron microscopes all governed by computer programs. And, similar to the pictures we get from the Hubble, the pictures we obtain of the atomic level from a scanning tunneling electron microscope are "computer enhanced." The enhancement consists of, among other things, providing the vivid coloring so characteristic of nano-scale pictures. The crucial thing here is that we would see nothing without the computer enhancements since there is no color at the atomic level. The computer makes it possible for us to gain knowledge of the structures of the atomic level, knowledge that would otherwise be impossible.

If instruments are essential components of the development of science, attending to their roles and their own development is equally essential to our understanding of the developing sciences. As was merely suggested above, there are complicated relationships between the construction and use of an instrument and its impact on a science. But, likewise, the instruments themselves are impacted by the demands of the various sciences. New theories allow for novel predictions the testing of which requires new instruments or enhanced versions of old instruments, and the symbiotic interplay proceeds. Attending to the transformation of science and its instruments also means attending to the environments in which the science is being conducted – if you will, the social. In so doing, science itself becomes a much more vibrant and exciting world than sterile theories of scientific change would have us believe.

#### References and Further Reading

Ackermann, R. J. (1985). *Data, Instruments, and Theory: A Dialectical Approach to Understanding Science* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).

Galison, P. (1997). *Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).

Kuhn, T. S. (1970). *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions*, 2nd edn (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).

Lakatos, I. (1978). *The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes*, ed. J. Worrall and G. Currie (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Laudan, L. (1977). *Progress and Its Problems* (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press).

Pitt, J. (2005). "When Is an Image Not an Image?," *Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology*, 8 (3).

Rasmussen, N. (1999). *Picture Control* (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press).

Turner, G. L. (1990). *Scientific Instruments and Experimental Philosophy 1550–1850* (Aldershot: Variorum).
