---
images: []
order: 72
title: Technology and Artifacts
---

Technology is normally associated with the production of abiotic/exbiotic artifacts, such as houses, machines. Aristotle, in his analysis in terms of the four causes – material, efficient, formal and final – used a statue as prototype of an artifact. This might have, subconsciously, over the centuries, influenced our understanding of the concept of artifact, making it difficult for some to grasp that artifacts could be either abiotic or biotic. This means that a living organism could be transformed by human technology to become an artifact;3 this is to say that the ontological status of a living organism as a naturally occurring being could, in principle, be transformed to become that of an artifactual one.

Artifacts are, therefore, the ontological foil of naturally occurring beings. The latter may be defined as that which have come into existence, continue to exist, and go out of existence, in principle, independently of human existence or manipulation; the former, in contrast, may be defined as the material embodiment of human intentionality, as they would not have come into existence, continue/cease to exist without the explicit intention and intervention of *Homo faber*. The ontological difference between the two domains may be further explained in terms of the following three theses of teleology:

- 1. External this may be said to embody a strident anthropocentrism as it holds that Earth has come into existence for the very specific purpose of serving humans, a view which is not uniformly sanctioned and championed by contemporary theological thought, nor is it compatible with scientific thought since Darwin, whose theory of natural selection precisely dispenses with such a thesis: natural evolution, in accordance with natural selection, does not require the intervention of extraneous ends or designs, whether supernatural or human. Instead, the mechanism of natural selection is consonant with and requires the second thesis of teleology.
- 2. Intrinsic/immanent each organism is simply concerned with maintaining its own functioning integrity in order to survive and to reproduce itself; in other words, it exists "by itself " (as it has come into existence independently of humans) and "for itself " (as it breathes, ingests nutrients, excretes waste, reproduces independently of humans) as an autopoietic being. Those individuals which happen to have certain traits (in their genetic make-up) which are favorable to survival and reproduction in a certain environment are able to leave behind offspring (or more offspring); those which do not, either die before they reach maturity to reproduce, simply fail to reproduce, or their offspring themselves die as soon as they are born or fail to

thrive and to survive to sexual maturity. In other words, the theory of natural selection in natural evolution, while denying external teleology, presupposes intrinsic/ immanent teleology if it is to be intelligible. However, Aristotle may be said to hold both; but it would be a travesty of this thought to ignore his implication that intrinsic/immanent teleology is prior to external teleology. As a result, his anthropocentrism is more nuanced than certain modern versions, which simply uphold external teleology, while rejecting intrinsic/immanent teleology.

3. Extrinsic/imposed – *Homo faber* in making an artifact expresses its own will and intention; the *telos* (formal and final causes) of the artifact is designed into it, while the *telos* of a naturally occurring being has nothing to do with human design and manipulation. Should, one day in the future, the human species with its peculiar kind of consciousness go out of existence, the concept of artifacts would die with it – there would be no more motor cars, no more Chartres cathedral, only piles of matter such as metal, stone, wood, etc. In contrast, the oak or the bee, as autopoietic beings, would continue on their own respective trajectories, living out their own respective *tele,* which unfold altogether independently of human existence, intention, sustenance or intervention.

### Biology, Technology and Biotic artifacts

Craft-based technology was used in transforming living organisms to become biotic artifacts when the first plants or animals were domesticated about ten thousand years ago. The process of domestication was based on trial and error, although it has led to spectacular results indeed. It remains the method in many parts of the world even today, but in the developed world it has been, by and large, superseded by double hybridization (1930s), a technology induced by the fundamental discoveries of the first revolution in genetics, namely Mendelian genetics, and since the 1970s it is supplemented (rather than totally superseded) by biotechnology, induced by the fundamental discoveries of the second revolution in genetics of the twentieth century, namely DNA genetics (1957) and molecular biology.

What these three types of technology have in common, in spite of the great differences between them, is their common goal of transforming naturally occurring organisms to become biotic artifacts – humankind through them selects a particular characteristic(s) possessed by a plant/animal deemed to be desirable (high yield, drought-resistance) or a specific characteristic deemed to be undesirable (prone to pest-infestation, too short/too tall) to be bred in or out of the organism.

In other words, at each of these three levels of technological development, the concept of the biotic artifact correspondingly evolved. Under craft-based technology of artificial selection and breeding, the procedure for achieving the breeder's goal usually took a very long time, sometimes even hundreds of years, as it depended by and large on trial and error. The length of time is also dependent on generational duration, on how long it takes for the organism to become sexually mature and reproduce; the fruit fly (*Drosophila melanogaster*) has a life cycle of only two weeks, whereas an elephant of even over seventy years. Such a technology implicitly recognizes (in sexually reproducing organisms) that males and females transmit their characteristics to their offspring. This

common-sense or proto-scientific knowledge served humankind well until the arrival of the (classical) science of genetics with the rediscovery of Mendel's laws of inheritance in 1901, followed by the discovery of the chromosome (Thomas Hunt Morgan), when it was established that genetic material is carried by genes on chromosomes – this made clear why the earlier craft-based technology had worked as well as it did. As a result, artificial selection and breeding became a scientific, more precise and controlled undertaking; its procedures also shorten the length of time required to achieve the desired outcomes, even though, like the more primitive technology it has superseded, Mendelian technology also rests (in the case of sexual reproduction) on the exchange of genetic material (contained in the whole sperm and egg) in the act of reproducing the zygote (embryo) irrespective of whether reproduction takes place *in vivo* or *in vitro*. However, this limitation is finally overcome with the arrival of biotechnology slightly more than half a century since the first appearance of Mendelian hybridization. Biotechnology, as we all know, enables humankind to bypass the traditional route of genetic transmission, as it is based not so much on the whole sperm or egg, but only on specific DNA sequences containing characteristics deemed desirable or undesirable which can be inserted or removed at will.

The above confirms that the greater and the deeper our understanding and knowledge of how living organisms function and reproduce, the greater, the more precise is our ability to control and manipulate living organisms, in our attempts ontologically to transform them from being naturally occurring entities to become biotic artifacts. As artifacts, they differ from abiotic/exbiotic ones in that, while the latter are inert, they are alive. However, the fact that they are alive, that they breathe, eat, excrete, grow, develop and reproduce, does not necessarily undermine the claim that they are artifacts, as those autopoietic biological mechanisms have been captured and diverted by *Homo faber* to serve, no longer their own *tele*, but the goals and intentions of humankind – true, the transgenic cow still produces milk, but the milk she produces contains a human protein which is alien to the cow genome, and which has deliberately been inserted into it in order to advance a specific human (pharmaceutical) end.

The deeper the science, the deeper becomes the level of manipulation through its corresponding technology, and therefore also the deeper the level of artifacticity embodied by its products. Domesticates produced by the craft-based technology of artificial selection/breeding by trial and error are, therefore, at the lowest level of artifacticity. The next level is brought about by Mendelian hybridization technology, operating still through the whole organism in reproduction, but, nevertheless, at the same time, focusing on the gene-chromosome (cellular level) as the unit of genetic transmission. Finally, with the arrival of DNA genetics and biology at an even deeper level of understanding, the technology it engenders operates at a correspondingly far deeper level, namely the molecular level, thereby generating an even greater level of artifacticity in its end products. Biotechnology no longer relies on breeding in the traditional sense which underpins both craft-based and Mendelian technologies, but bypasses it; this enables biotechnology to be a much more radical technology than that based on the gene-chromosome theory, as it can cross not only species but also kingdom barriers. Not only can the transgenic cow be made to express a human protein in her otherwise normal cow milk; the transgenic tomato can be made frost-resistant by having inserted into its genome a DNA sequence belonging to the flounder fish. *Ex hypothesi*, in terms

of natural evolution, the cow and the human could not mate; neither could the tomato plant with the flounder fish. This testifies to the radical nature of biotechnology, the deep level at which it manipulates genetic material, and hence the depth of artifacticity in its transgenic products.
