---
images: []
order: 76
title: WILLIAM J. NUTTALL
---

### 1. Introduction

Nuclear technologies lie close to the heart of the post-Second World War *Zeitgeist.* They give us the Bomb and nuclear power, which shaped, and were shaped by, sociopolitical change, including mass protest. The power of the atom challenges technocratic notions of: utilitarianism, several domains of ethics, political philosophy, and the impact of technology on society. Nuclear science has made numerous contributions to medicine for diagnosis and therapy. However, here we shall restrict discussion to the domains most closely connected to the core of nuclear science – fission.

### 2. The Physicists and the Bomb

Key to the provenance of nuclear technologies is physics. Physics was transformed by the Second World War. Physics had given the Allies radar and the atom bomb.1 Before the Second World War physics had not been appreciated:

. . . industries had been peculiarly obtuse in not seeing any conceivable use for physicists. Young men in the 1930s, with doctorates and good research to their credit, considered themselves lucky to get decent jobs in schools.

(Snow [1981], p. 42)

In the 1920s and 1930s the first murmurings of the nuclear age came from solitary figures working in small academic groups on the European continent.2 The only industrialization of nuclear properties concerned the use of radium in largely unscientific medical therapies and for luminous dials for clocks and aircraft instrumentation. Radium, a highly radioactive element, occurs naturally as the result of the radioactive decay of isotopes of thorium and uranium.3 One of these isotopes, uranium-235, is fissionable, i.e. can be split when hit by a neutron releasing large amounts of nuclear energy. "Collect enough uranium-235, and there was the chance of an immense explosion. There the pure science finished" (Snow [1981], p. 100). Uranium-235 fission also made possible the first self-sustaining nuclear reactor. Enrico Fermi's 1942

Chicago Pile-1 also demonstrated production of the man-made, but stable, fissile isotope: plutonium-239.

The use of fission in the Second World War Manhattan Project, and the resulting atomic bomb, transformed physics. For the history of the development of the fission weapon in the UK and the US, see Ronald Clark's *The Birth of the Bomb* and Richard Rhodes's *The Making of the Atomic Bomb.*

Even before the detonation of the first nuclear weapon at the Trinity Test in New Mexico on 16 July 1945, the first signs of dissent had emerged within the scientific team. Joseph Rotblat (Nobel Peace Prize 1995) was the first scientist to resign from nuclear weapons work on the grounds of conscience. Rotblat believed that scientists should be concerned with the ethical consequences of their work and he would go on to be the youngest signatory of the pacifist Russell–Einstein memorandum of 1955.4 Klaus Fuchs was another Eastern European physicist who passed through the UK on his way to the Manhattan Project. Fuchs's response to his, and his family's, experiences under the Nazis was to betray the Allies' nuclear secrets to the Soviet Union. The Second World War and the Cold War led the physicists to confront realities for which they had not been trained. Their world had changed. "To the chagrin of most physicists, and the apprehension of some, the Cold War not only produced an escalation of the arms race; it also put barbed wire and guarded gates around the Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley" (Kevles [1971], p. 378).

Despite the individual misgivings, the physicists found themselves the winners in a competition for defense research funding. This has been described as a "victory for elitism" (Kevles [1971], ch. 22). The power of nuclear physics was tangible, rational, secretive, and the underpinning knowledge obscure. Nuclear technologies emerging from the hyper-rationalist world of physics and the largely unquestioning hierarchism of military control became arguably the most positivist and technocratic of postwar technological developments. Although Rotblat and others hoped to undermine this paradigm from within, they and their concerns were soon forced out *beyond the wire* both literally and metaphorically.

### 3. Thermonuclear Weapons and the Cold War

The building of the vast nuclear military industrial complexes (to use President Eisenhower's cautionary phrase5 ) occurred during the Cold War. The dominant project was not the atom bomb but the thousand-times-more-powerful thermonuclear fusion weapon – the H-bomb*.* The Soviet Union and the United States raced to produce a deliverable fusion weapon. The first deliverable weapon test with a fusion element to the blast actually occurred in the Soviet Union with the adoption of Andrei Sakharov and Vitali Ginzburg's Layer Cake single-stage design in which Lithium Deuteride (for fusion) was layered in with the elements of a fission weapon boosting its yield (Rhodes, 1995). The concept was successfully tested to a 400 kilotonne yield in the "Joe-4" test of 12 August 1953. This, however, was not a two-stage *hydrogen bomb* with the possibility of a megatonne yield. That required an elegant breakthrough insight from Stanislaw Ulam and Edward Teller in the United States. The resulting megatonne test of the enormous Mike device predated the Joe-4 test, occurring on 1 November 1952.

The first deliverable hydrogen bomb, Castle Bravo, was tested by the US on 1 March 1954. The Ulam–Teller insight is (probably) still not in the public domain today. That, however, has not stopped the publication of the secret of the H-bomb from having a place in the history of the US Constitution. The US Federal Government, for only the second time in its history (the first being the Pentagon Papers), briefly sought a prior-restraint injunction barring a magazine, *The Progressive*, from publishing on the grounds of national security*,* although later publication occurred legally.6 Nuclear technologies were affecting notions of the freedom of the press.

In addition, the threat of nuclear war was altering notions of fear. Nuclear technologies have several special places in the history of fear: the blast, the fallout, and post-apocalyptic Hobbesian societies (Bourke 2005). Spencer R. Weart has splendidly argued that nuclear technologies were frightening before nuclear fission had even been discovered. The attributes of nuclear fear – that, for instance, radiation is imposed, invisible and mutating – have always existed in the human mind (Weart 1988). The realities of nuclear fear shape the policy landscape not just for nuclear weapons, but also for nuclear power generation; and it is arguable that nuclear energy, if it is to progress, must establish a new social contract with lower levels of technocracy, secrecy and fear (Nuttall 2006). This raises notions of risk and trust in our changing societies, and these matters have been ably explored by Ragnar E. Löfstedt (2005).

The notions that nuclear technologies are fearful products of insufficiently accountable technocratic elites lead one to two vital questions. The first is essentially anthropological. Why would decent people work on such technologies? Hugh Gusterson has shown that decent, often liberal progressive people work for the US Sandia National Laboratory on nuclear weapons systems and given a range of insights as to why (Gusterson 1998). The second question concerns the substance of the moral issues inherent in nuclear weapons. For these aspects the work of Douglas P. Lackey is particularly insightful, albeit stoical, separating, as he attempts to do, nuclear weapons from nuclear war (Lackey 1984). He considers nuclear weapons through the lenses of human welfare, rights and justice. He makes clear that nuclear weapons relate to notions of a *Just War*, <sup>7</sup> force a stronger separation of the tactical from the strategic and drive consideration of détente and risk.

### 4. Atoms for Peace

Nuclear technologies are, of course, far more than those of weapons. The development of civil nuclear power in the USA, the Soviet Union, Britain and France followed shortly behind the weapons programs. The world's earliest nuclear reactor for electrical power was at Obninsk, Soviet Union (1954), followed by the first commercialscale plant at Calder Hall, UK (1956). The first US power reactor was developed at Shippingport, Pennsylvania, in 1957. These civil initiatives followed a major US push to internationalize the benefits of nuclear power via the "Atoms for Peace" process launched by President Eisenhower at the United Nations on 8 December 1953. The process yielded a series of celebrated exhibitions in far-flung places, some with dubious nuclear futures, such as Tehran, Iran, and Karachi, Pakistan (Weart [1988], p. 163).

Arguably the world's most successful innovation in civil nuclear power has been the development of light water reactors (LWRs). These technologies use ordinary water as both a reactor coolant and a neutron moderator.8 Two main types exist – the Pressurized Water Reactor, developed as an offshoot of US naval propulsion research, and a later innovation, the Boiling Water Reactor. While early European reactors which used graphite as a moderator (e.g. the Magnox series) bear similarities to technologies previously developed for weapons plutonium production, the US LWRs had little or no connection with nuclear weapons. Interestingly, the LWRs had naval military origins not dissimilar to the military aviation origins of the gas turbines now widely used to generate electricity. It is also important to note the existence of the Canadian Deuterium Uranium Reactor series known as 'CANDU'. This civil power plant technology has completely civilian origins, but sadly its benign credentials became badly tarnished when, in 1974, India used materials obtained from its CANDU program to conduct its so-called "Peaceful Nuclear Explosion" (PNE) (Nuttall [2005], §II.5.2). While India's interest in the peaceful possibilities of nuclear explosions appears to have been less than sincere, it is interesting to note that both the US (with its Plowshare program) and the Soviet Union ("Industrial Explosions") had previously considered the possibilities of PNEs.

In my book *Nuclear Renaissance* I consider the prospects for the future of civil nuclear power via three policy lenses – economics, the environment and the security of energy supplies. The book comments on proliferation and security in an afterword and notes that a nuclear renaissance does not require the production of either highly enriched uranium or separated plutonium (the key ingredients of nuclear weapons). The North Koreans seemingly joined the nuclear weapons club in October 2006,9 and now the relationship between, to quote the title of a recent book, *Nuclear Power and the Spread of Nuclear Weapons* has become ever more pressing (Leventhal, Tanzer and Dolley 2005). Jacques Hymans argues in his book *The Psychology of Nuclear Proliferation* that the psychology of individual leaders has always mattered greatly in regard to whether a country develops nuclear weapons. Kim-Jong Il and Kim Il Sung would appear to be no exceptions.
