---
images: []
order: 84
title: A Design
---

The outcome of an engineering design process involves typically a material object or its description. These objects are technical artifacts and are different from natural objects in that they are based on (human) designs. Exactly what a design in this sense is, is not so easy to spell out. On the one hand, a design may be taken to be a blueprint for production: a description of all the physical (chemical) properties of a technical artifact that are relevant for actually making a token of the artifact type defined by the design. In this sense, a design is a complete description of all the parts and their relations. But this does not capture the full notion of design. Somebody with the appropriate skills and equipment would be able to produce such a technical artifact without having any idea what it is for. The notion of design has strong teleological connotations in that a designed object has a specific property of "*for-*ness" as it has been made to do something: to be *for* something (see analysis of teleology in relation to technical artifacts in McLaughlin 2001). A design may therefore, on the other hand, also include a description of the function of the technical artifact, and furthermore (usually implicitly) an explanation of how the physical structure realizes that function (Kroes 1998). In this "thick" sense, a design becomes a description of a "teleological arrangement" of physical parts that together realize a function.

A closer look at the outcome of a design process shows that it is not just a (description of a) technical artifact, but that it also comprises the manual, that is, the description of how to use the technical artifact correctly. The outcome may, therefore, be characterized as a "*use*-plan," that is, as a considered series of actions to achieve a certain end, with (a description of ) the technical means necessary for executing the "*use*-plan" (for more details, see Houkes, Vermaas et al. 2002).

The growing complexity of modern technical artifacts and the use of computers in supporting the solution of engineering design problems have increased the need for more formal, unambiguous representations of designs. Such representations are important in developing engineering data management systems for computer-aided design (CAD). Especially the formal representation of a function has proved problematic (Dym 1994). Much work is being done in developing taxonomies of functional primitives (a field sometimes referred to as "functional modeling"), functional representation and functional reasoning in AI quarters with the aim of supporting engineers in solving design problems and accurately representing design solutions.

### The Design Process

According to the ABET description, engineering design is a decision-making process. Designing involves decision-making on different levels, at different stages and about different kinds of issues. Simon (1996 [1969]) considers this decision-making process to be all about the problem of making rational choices between available alternatives. Bucciarelli (1996) characterizes it more as a social process in which negotiations between different stakeholders also play a role, thus stressing that more is involved in engineering design than mere instrumental rationality.

From the point of view of the object to be designed, the engineering design process can be described as a process through which a functional description of the object is "translated" into a structural description. A purely functional description of an object "black-boxes" its internal structure; it is oriented toward the environment of the object and describes it in terms of desired input–output relations. Three different kinds of input–output relations are often distinguished, which correspond to the conversion of matter, energy and information. A structural description specifies all the physical/ chemical properties of the technical artifact (as in the blueprint for production) and how it will behave under various input conditions. The structural description, however, does not specify which one of all possible input–output relations is the one that corresponds to the desired function: in this sense, the structural description black-boxes, so to speak, the environment. To what extent the content of the black box is, in practice, already fixed at the beginning of the design process depends strongly on the nature (radical or normal) of the design task.

What kind of reasoning and knowledge is involved in translating a function into a structure? From a logical point of view, it is not possible to deduce structure from function (form does not follow function in a logical sense), nor the other way around. In solving this translation problem, "means–ends" reasoning seems to be of paramount importance. Means–ends reasoning is based on causal relationships (Von Wright 1963). If we know that A causes B, then we can realize B by bringing about A (if this is technologically possible). So A can be considered as the *means* in relation to B, the *end*. In spite of its importance in engineering practice (and daily life), the formal (logical) analysis of means–end reasoning has received relatively little attention up till now. The intimate relation between means–ends reasoning and causal relations explains why scientific knowledge plays such a dominant role in modern design practice. However, it would be misleading to interpret engineering design as simply the application of scientific knowledge (or knowledge produced by the engineering sciences). According to Vincenti (1990, ch. 7), the anatomy of engineering design knowledge includes at least six different categories of knowledge, some of which do not derive from scientific knowledge at all (such as the "know how" acquired on the shop-floor). All these various kinds of knowledge are important for turning a functional description of the object to be designed into a structural one.

The overall design process may be divided into various phases or steps that correspond to distinguishable aspects of solving a design problem. Within design methodology the triad "analysis–synthesis–evaluation" is often taken as a starting-point for modeling the design process. As long as designing is an activity performed by a single individual, these phases are relevant mainly from a conceptual point of view. But as soon as designing becomes a matter of teamwork, which is by and large the situation in modern industry dealing with complex and large systems, the phasing of the design process becomes an important institutional tool for organizing, controlling and steering the process of product development. The well-known VDI phase diagram for the design process contains seven steps (with iterations between these steps). These steps are: clarify and define the task; determine functions and their structure; search for solution principles and their combinations; divide into realizable modules; develop layout of key modules; complete overall layout; prepare production and operating instructions (VDI 1987).

A problem that hampers discussions about the usefulness of implementing such phase diagrams in engineering practice is deciding which criteria can measure the success of the outcome of an engineering design process. From a strictly engineering point of view, the simplest success criterion is simply meeting the list of specifications. But this assumes that the list of specifications is fixed immutably at the beginning of the design process, which is often not the case. Because of problems encountered on the way, they may have to be adjusted during the design process. Furthermore, decisions about what performance criteria to use and the development of methods for measuring these performance criteria are often an integral part of the design process. Moreover, various participants may evaluate the outcome in different ways. In spite of these difficulties, design methodologists claim that implementation of systematic approaches to design improves the design process (see, for instance, Pahl and Beitz 1996, pp. 499–501).

### Rationality and Creativity in Engineering Design

The lack of clear criteria for evaluating the outcome of design processes also affects discussions about the role of rationality in engineering design. The ABET definition suggests that the decision-making in engineering design is strongly governed by instrumental rationality, that is, choosing the right means for realizing a given end. The objective is set from outside, and the design process is about finding the optimal means to realize this objective. The fundamental norms or values on which instrumental rationality is based are efficacy and efficiency; these would constitute the main criteria for evaluating the outcome of the design process. This view on the role of rationality in engineering design is problematic. As already remarked, the objective itself may have to be adjusted. Decisions on how to redefine the objective, however, fall outside the scope of pure instrumental rationality. Furthermore, engineering design is not just about rationally choosing the best alternative from a given set of options (even, that is, from the point of view of rational choice theory not always a straightforward matter; problems arise in case various options have to be evaluated against multiple criteria [Franssen 2005]). Engineering design is also, and often primarily, about generating the various options (means) from which a choice can be made. Here, decisions have to be made about how many options to generate, about which options to drop because they are too problematic, about which options to develop further because they are promising (and all this under constraints of time and

resources, which themselves may become the object of decisions or negotiations). It seems highly unlikely that such decisions can be justified on the basis of instrumental reasoning. This is not to say that engineering design is irrational but that the notion of instrumental rationality is too narrow a concept adequately to analyse the issue of rationality in engineering design.

Engineering design, therefore, is essentially a creative activity since it is all about creating new technical artifacts and processes. It is often thought that the use of rational problem-solving methods stifles creativity, especially within those engineering disciplines in which aesthetic criteria are more important. There is, however, no reason to assume that creativity and rationality do not both make a valuable contribution to engineering design. On the one hand, design involves the generation of new ideas for solving design problems, while on the other hand these ideas have to be evaluated against available resources, customer requirements, in-house state-ofthe-art technology, production facilities and so on. Coming up with proposals may require creative thinking; but, once the proposals are on the table, choices have to be made and then the rational appraisal of the various options comes into play. Creativity and rationality are complementary elements that are both necessary for effective engineering design.

#### Acknowledgment

I am grateful to the Netherlands Institute of Advanced Study (NIAS) for providing me with the opportunity, as a Fellow-in-Residence, to complete this paper.

#### Note

1. http://www.me.unlv.edu/Undergraduate/coursenotes/meg497/ABETdefinition.htm (accessed 28 September 2006).

#### References and Further Reading

Bucciarelli, L. L. (1996). *Designing Engineers* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

Dym, C. L. (1994). *Engineering Design: A Synthesis of Views* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Franssen, M. (2005). "Arrow's Theorem, Multi-criteria Decision Problems and Multi-attribute Design Problems in Engineering Design," *Research in Engineering Design*, 16: 42–56.

Houkes, W. N., Vermaas, P. E. et al. (2002). "Design and Use as Plans: An Action-theoretical Account," *Design Studies*, 23 (3): 303–20.

Kroes, P. A. (1998). "Technological Explanations: The Relation between Structure and Function of Technological Objects," *Techné*, 3 (3): 18–34.

McLaughlin, P. (2001). *What Functions Explain: Functional Explanation and Self-reproducing Systems* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Pahl, G. and Beitz, W. (1996). *Engineering Design: A Systematic Approach* (London: Springer Verlag). Sage, A. P. (1992). *Systems Engineering* (New York: John Wiley).

Simon, H. A. (1996 [1969]). *The Sciences of the Artificial* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

VDI (1987). *VDI Design Handbook 2221: Systematic Approach to the Design of Technical Systems and Products*, trans. K. Wallace (Düsseldorf: VDI-Verlag).

Vincenti, W. G. (1990). *What Engineers Know and How They Know It* (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press).

Von Wright, G. H. (1963). "Practical Inference," *The Philosophical Review*, 72 (2): 159–79.
