---
images: []
order: 87
title: ANDREW PICKERING
---

The canonical history of cybernetics is US- and Wiener-centric. It begins with Norbert Wiener's work at MIT during the Second World War that sought (unsuccessfully) to build an anti-aircraft predictor – a machine which could extrapolate a plane's trajectory into the future and hence improve the chances of shooting it down (Galison 1994; Mindell 2002). Philosophically, the key feature of this device was that it could be thought of as both a purposeful machine in itself and as a model for understanding purposeful behavior in living creatures, thus eliding the distinction between machines, animals and humans – an idea set out in a classic essay by Rosenblueth, Wiener and Bigelow (1943) and developed at greater length in the 1948 book that first gained the field worldwide attention, Wiener's *Cybernetics; or, Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine*. Alongside Wiener himself, historical attention has focused on a series of conferences supported by the Macy Foundation between 1946 and 1953 as the principal locus for the elaboration of cybernetic ideas in the US (Pias 2003, 2004). Both Heims (1991) and Dupuy (2000) have written book-length studies based on the Macy *Proceedings*, the former focusing on cybernetics as social science, the latter as cognitive science. The chairman of the Macy meetings was neuropsychiatrist and philosopher Warren McCulloch, the most important figure in the immediate postwar history of US cybernetics (Kay 2001); the secretary for the later meetings and editor of the *Proceedings* was the Austrian émigré physicist Heinz von Foerster. Institutional centers of cybernetics were the Research Laboratory of Electronics at MIT, where McCulloch's group was based, and the Biological Computer Laboratory at the University of Illinois established by Foerster (1958–75: Müller and Müller, forthcoming). Beyond the canonical history, cybernetics had a rich and varied life outside the US. It flourished in France and Germany, and became almost the official science of the Soviet Union (Gerovitch 2002). In Britain, the publication of *Cybernetics* catalysed the formation of the Ratio Club, an informal dining club of proto-cyberneticians that met between 1949 and 1958 (Pickering forthcoming).

The substance of cybernetics can be defined in many ways. Wiener's book ran together several concerns and new developments of the wartime era, including notions of feedback control, neural networks (Anderson and Rosenfeld 1998), information theory and the new electronic digital computers, and all of these have their own history. It is perhaps better to define early cybernetics in terms of its primary referent: the brain.

Though this has been obscured by Wiener's background in mathematics, cybernetics began as a science of the brain, and its distinctive character derived from its conception of the brain as an organ of performance rather than of cognition – the brain as a key organ in our bodily functioning and, especially, in our adaptation to situations we have never encountered before. And, materially, one hallmark of early cybernetics was the construction of electromechanical models that could illuminate "the go" of the performative and adaptive brain (Cordeschi 2002). Wiener's predictor was such a model, exemplifying a functional system that might underlie goal-oriented behavior more generally. In 1948 two of the British cyberneticians, Grey Walter and Ross Ashby, built further important models (Asaro 2006). Walter's "tortoises" were mobile robots that searched for and homed in on lights; Ashby's "homeostat" randomly reconfigured itself to come into dynamic equilibrium with differing environments. These machines could be understood as models of the pathological as well as the normal brain, and thus offered a novel scientific basis for psychiatry (to which McCulloch, Ashby and Walter all had professional affiliations). On the other side of the Atlantic, in the 1950s, Gregory Bateson, one of the founders of the Macy conference series, developed a very different but also cybernetic approach to psychiatry, which was put into practice in the 1960s by R. D. Laing and others at Kingsley Hall in London. In its early years, then, cybernetics constituted a singular conflation of novel forms of adaptive engineering and robotics, brain science and psychiatry, and this protean quality continued to mark the subsequent development of the field as it was extended beyond the brain into many areas, including biological computing (Asaro forthcoming), social theory and practice, politics, spirituality, education, music, the arts, theater and architecture. And, although the word "cybernetics" has gone out of fashion, much current work in all sorts of fields – including management, complexity theory, robotics and the arts – continues to elaborate distinctly cybernetic approaches.

There is presently a growing resurgence of interest in cybernetics across the humanities and social sciences, with Donna Haraway's "Manifesto for Cyborgs" (1985) and N. Katherine Hayles's *How We Became Posthuman* (1999) amongst the key works – an interest that reflects the conviction that cybernetics is a "new kind of science" (Wolfram 2002) importantly different from more familiar sciences such as physics or mainstream sociology. One way to get at that difference is ontologically (Pickering 2002; forthcoming). As the subtitle of Wiener's founding book suggests, cybernetics decenters the human and effaces the usual dualisms of modernity, putting humans, animals, machines and nature on the same plane and emphasizing both parallels and constitutive inter-relations between them. More generally, another cybernetician, Stafford Beer (1959), argued that modern sciences like physics are sciences of knowable systems, and defined cybernetics, in contrast, as the science of "exceedingly complex systems" – systems that we can engage with but which we can never fully understand. The central problematic of cybernetics on this definition is a concern with how such systems (including ourselves) can get along and come to terms with one another (and hence the centrality to cybernetics of the adaptive rather than the cognitive brain).

The tortoise and the homeostat were early materializations of this ontology, each adapting in its own way to its environment, performatively rather than cognitively, and many of the strangest and the most imaginative cybernetic projects subsequently staged some version of the same ontological stance. Around 1960, Beer and another cybernetician, Gordon Pask, developed a distinctive approach to "biological computing," which sought to entrain some naturally occurring, exceedingly complex system – a pond ecosystem, for example – as a controller for another such system, a factory. In the early 1950s, Pask built a machine called Musicolour which translated musical sounds into a light show. The key feature of the machine was that its internal parameters changed in time as a function of the performance itself, so that the performer was never in full command but had instead to adapt to the emergent properties of the machine (themselves adapting to the performance). Musicolour, in turn, was a model for Pask's later work on adaptive architecture – both on reconfigurable buildings that could respond to emergent patterns of use and invite new ones, and on design systems that, as exceedingly complex systems, could genuinely collaborate with architects (Mathews 2003; Sadler 2005).

A sort of politics, or subpolitics, goes with the cybernetic ontology. The modern sciences and philosophy often portray the world asymmetrically in a way that is centered on human knowledge and agency: we know the world and can thus bend it to our will. From a cybernetic perspective, this is nonsense. Implicit in the cybernetic decentering is a notion of respect for the other (human or non-human): if we cannot dominate exceedingly complex systems, we should be interested in their performances and alert to unexpected possibilities as well as dangers. One thinks here of Heidegger's (1976) contrast between "enframing" and "revealing". Enframing characterizes late modernity, with its grim obsession with dictating to people and things how they should behave, and with disaster as its frequent corollary (think of New Orleans and Hurricane Katrina, or the US invasion of Iraq); revealing is open to what the world has to offer us. In general, cybernetic projects and products look very different from their more familiar modern counterparts. Politically, we could see them as a set of sketches of another future, another way to be in the world. This, no doubt, is another source of the renewed interest in the field.

Other outgrowths of cybernetics have taken ontological decentering further. If modernity is characterized by a whole constellation of dualisms and dichotomies that circle around specific definitions of mind, brain, body, self, spirit and matter, then cybernetics is a non-modern science focused on continuities and inter-relations between all these terms. This has translated, for example, into an interest in strange performances and altered states. Grey Walter's *The Living Brain* (1953) discusses the ability of Eastern yogis to suspend normal bodily functions (breathing, the heartbeat) as well as the achievement of nirvana. These altered states can in turn be associated with material "technologies of the self " (Foucault 1988), with the self now understood as itself decentered and non-modern. Walter was very interested in flicker – the effects brought on by stroboscopic light – including epilepsy (brain science again) but also visions – of moving geometrical patterns and scenes that are not there. (Huxley 1956 is a long catalogue of technologies of the non-modern self, including flicker and psychedelic drugs.)

Eastern philosophy crops up repeatedly in the history of cybernetics, and we can understand this along similar lines. From one angle, meditation is a technology of the non-modern self. From another, Bateson and Laing appealed to Buddhist philosophy to grasp the altered states that characterize schizophrenia and to reconceptualize psychiatric therapy. Stafford Beer taught tantric yoga and integrated his tantric experiences and beliefs into his cybernetic approach to management and organization. Coming from the direction of matter rather than of self, cybernetics has often been associated with a certain hylozoism – a vision of matter itself as lively and infused both with mind and spirit – and with a distinctly non-modern stance on design. Modern design imagines an artful rearrangement of matter to bring it into conformity with our purposes; hylozoism, in contrast, suggests an exploratory engagement with the agency of things. Think of biological computing juxtaposed to the industrial manufacture of digital computers. Much cybernetic art has a hylozoist quality, thematizing the agency of nature: a tortoise-like robot, for instance, controlled by a cockroach instead of electrical circuitry (Hertz 2006).

Finally, as a non-modern science, cybernetics has resonated with wider nonmodern cultural formations. The heyday of cybernetics was the 1960s when it crossed over into the counterculture and its "explorations of consciousness." William Burroughs and the Beat writers and artists were, like Aldous Huxley, intensely interested in flicker, for example. Kingsley Hall was a key site for both a radical cybernetic psychiatry and the London "underground" scene. Gordon Pask's *Colloquy of Mobiles* – an assembly of robots designated male and female that engaged in uncertain matings via sounds and lights – was exhibited at the *Cybernetic Serendipity* exhibition at the Institute for Contemporary Arts in London in 1968. Since then modernity has regained and intensified its grip on the popular imagination, but echoes of cybernetics can still be found in all sorts of cultural formations running from "cyberculture" (Turner 2006) to New Age philosophy and spirituality.

#### References and Further Reading

- Anderson, J. A. and Rosenfeld, E. (eds) (1998). *Talking Nets: An Oral History of Neural Nets* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Asaro, P. (2006). "Working Models and the Synthetic Method: Electronic Brains as Mediators between Neurons and Behavior," *Science Studies*, 19 (1): 12–34.
- Asaro, P. (forthcoming). "Heinz von Foerster, the Bio-computing Movements of the 1960s and the Machines of the BCL," in A. Müller and K. H. Müller (eds), *A Disrupted Revolution? Heinz von Foerster and the Biological Computer Laboratory, 1958–1974* (Vienna: Edition Echoraum).
- Beer, S. (1959). *Cybernetics and Management* (London: English Universities Press).
- Cordeschi, R. (2002). *The Discovery of the Artificial: Behaviour, Mind and Machines before and beyond Cybernetics* (Dordrecht: Kluwer).
- Dupuy, J.-P. (2000). *The Mechanization of the Mind: On the Origins of Cognitive Science* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).
- Foucault, M. (1988). *Technologies of the Self: A Seminar with Michel Foucault*, ed. L. H. Martin, H. Gutman and P. H. Hutton (Amherst, Mass.: University of Massachusetts Press).
- Galison, P. (1994). "The Ontology of the Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the Cybernetic Vision," *Critical Inquiry*, 21: 228–66.
- Gerovitch, S. (2002). *From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Haraway, D. (1985). "A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the 1980s," *Socialist Review*, 80: 65–107; reprinted in Haraway (2004), *The Haraway Reader* (New York: Routledge), pp. 7–45.

#### andrew pickering

- Hayles, N. K. (1999). *How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).
- Heidegger, M. (1976 [1954]). "The Question Concerning Technology," in D. Krell (ed.), *Martin Heidegger: Basic Writings* (New York: Harper & Row), pp. 287–317.
- Heims, S. J. (1991). *The Cybernetics Group* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Hertz, G. (2006). "Cockroach Controlled Mobile Robot," www.conceptlab.com/roachbot/ (updated 16 October 2006).
- Huxley, A. (1956). *Heaven and Hell* (New York: Harper).
- Kay, L. E. (2001). "From Logical Neurons to Poetic Embodiments of Mind: Warren S. McCulloch's Project in Neuroscience," *Science in Context*, 14: 591–614.
- Mathews, S. (2003). "An Architecture for the New Britain: The Social Vision of Cedric Price's Fun Palace and Potteries Thinkbelt," PhD dissertation, Columbia University.
- Mindell, D. (2002). *Between Human and Machine: Feedback, Control, and Computing before Cybernetics* (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press).
- Müller, A. and Müller, K. H. (eds) (forthcoming). *A Disrupted Revolution? Heinz von Foerster and the Biological Computer Laboratory, 1958–1974* (Vienna: Edition Echoraum).
- Pias, C. (ed.) (2003). *Cybernetics-Kybernetik: The Macy-Conferences 1946–1953*, Vol. I, *Transactions* (Zürich/Berlin: Diaphanes).
- Pias, C. (ed.) (2004). *Cybernetics-Kybernetik: The Macy-Conferences 1946–1953*, Vol. II, *Essays and Documents* (Zürich/Berlin: Diaphanes).
- Pickering, A. (2002). "Cybernetics and the Mangle: Ashby, Beer and Pask," *Social Studies of Science*, 32: 413–37.
- Pickering, A. (forthcoming). *Sketches of Another Future: Cybernetics in Britain, 1940–2000*.
- Rosenblueth, A., Wiener, N. and Bigelow, J. (1943). "Behavior, Purpose and Teleology," *Philosophy of Science*, 10: 18–24.
- Sadler, S. (2005). *Archigram: Architecture without Architecture* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Turner, F. (2006). *From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth Network, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).
- Walter, W. G. (1953). *The Living Brain* (London: Duckworth).
- Wiener, N. (1948). *Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Wolfram, S. (2002). *A New Kind of Science* (Champaign, Ill.: Wolfram Media).
