---
images: []
order: 90
title: HELGE S. KRAGH
---

From a historical perspective, chemistry is the quintessential "mixed" science, as much concerned with making and developing useful materials as with generating scientific knowledge. Practical or technological chemistry was well known in ancient Egypt and continued to be developed in Europe, China and the Islamic world, independently of scientific or philosophical ideas of matter and its transformations. Until the seventeenth century, chemistry (or alchemy) was basically a craft rooted in empirical traditions, yet the absence of guidance from chemical theory did not prevent practical chemists from manufacturing many chemicals and developing new instruments and techniques. During the scientific revolution, the new corpuscular theories of matter, as developed by Pierre Gassendi, Robert Boyle and others, were inspired by practically working chemists and alchemists, but they did not result in new technological applications. Briefly, while scientific chemistry was to some extent technology-driven, progress in practical chemistry was by no means science-driven. To mention but one example, the discovery in 1669 of phosphorus – the first chemical element isolated since antiquity – was made by a Hamburg merchant and alchemist with no knowledge of scientific chemistry. Thirty years later, the discovery had been transformed into a commercial manufacture of phosphorus, a process in which science played no role.

It is, though, problematical to speak of the relationship between scientific and practical chemistry prior to the second half of the seventeenth century, as it was only then that chemistry began to take shape as a branch of science independent of production and medicine. By the start of the eighteenth century, chemistry had become a branch of natural philosophy, hence "scientific" in a sense recognizable today. The phlogiston theory was successful in so far as it provided, for the first time, a common framework for interpreting a wide range of chemical phenomena, but from a technological point of view it had little to offer.

Although the emergence of inorganic chemical industry in the second half of the eighteenth century coincided with the so-called chemical revolution of Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier and his allies, the actual impact of the new chemistry on industry was practically nil. Within a century, soda and sulfuric acid became the backbones of a heavy chemical industry of enormous economic significance, yet science played but a limited role in this success story. The popular view of early chemical industry as the fruit of new advances in scientific chemistry is not supported by historical research. Thus, the celebrated Nicolas Leblanc, who in 1789 developed the method of soda production named after him, was an ordinary chemical worker whose success did not depend on use of new scientific principles. By and large, until the mid-nineteenth century, chemical industry and technology was more important to scientific chemistry than the other way around. Several elements have been discovered, more or less accidentally, in connection with chemical manufactures (e.g. iodine in 1812 and selenium in 1817).

Nevertheless, it is with some justification that chemical industry is said to be the first industry that profited significantly from advances in pure science. There is even some truth in the claim that important parts of chemical industry around 1900 were science-based, in the sense that these industries would probably not have emerged and flourished had it not been that they utilized fairly new insights based in contemporary scientific research. A technology does not merit the epithet "science-based" merely because it happens to make use of knowledge or apparatus that have their origin in some scientific context; the science in question has to be *essential* to the technology.

The prime early example of a chemical industry rooted in science is the huge complex of organic–synthetic industry that emerged in Germany after 1870 and in which scientifically trained chemists played a crucial role. There is no simple road from August Kekulé's discovery of the hexagonal structure of benzene to the mass-production of organic dyes, but it is beyond doubt that pure science played an important role in the complex process. Whereas William Perkin's synthesis of mauvein in 1856 was serendipitous, later advances in industrial organic synthesis relied crucially on scientific insight in the structure of organic compounds and the corresponding reaction mechanisms. In the 1890s the German chemical company BASF succeeded in transforming laboratory-based knowledge into a full-scale industrial manufacture of indigo, a dyestuff of great economic importance. The entire process was based on scientific advances in organic synthesis and other branches of chemistry, but of course this is only half the story: although scientific advances were necessary conditions, they were not sufficient conditions.

Much the same story can be told about other breakthroughs in chemical industry in the first decades of the twentieth century, such as the Haber–Bosch process for synthetic production of ammonia fertilizers and the invention of nylon. The first case illustrates the maxim "Necessity is the mother of invention," whereas the second goes better with the inverted maxim "Invention is the mother of necessity." In the early years of the new century there was a marked shortage of nitrogen-rich fertilizers for European agriculture, which was the direct background for the high priority given to experiments with "fixating nitrogen," that is, to convert some of the atmosphere's molecular nitrogen to solid or liquid fertilizers. It did not require an expert chemist to make nitrogen react with hydrogen, but the problem was to maximize the yield under circumstances that were economically feasible. This turned out to be a formidable problem that involved scientific problems in chemical thermodynamics, equilibrium theory, high-pressure reactions and the mechanism of catalysis. It is an indication of the scientific basis of the Haber–Bosch process that its two main architects, the theoretical chemist Fritz Haber and his industrial colleague Carl Bosch, were both awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry; also two other Nobel laureates, Walther Nernst and Wilhelm Ostwald, had significantly contributed to the scientific knowledge that made the first industrial plant a reality in 1913. It is to be noted that the technology on which the

ammonia manufacture rested did not flow from scientific results obtained independently in the laboratory; rather, these results were direct responses to technological needs.

The history of the synthetic ammonia process exemplifies a class of technologically oriented research that takes on the character of fundamental scientific research, except that "techno-scientific" research programs are much more closely tied to socio-economic goals than academic-scientific research. Another noteworthy example from the pre-Second World War period is the American physical chemist Irving Langmuir, who worked for General Electric and whose experimental program (aimed at improving the efficiency of filament lamps) included surface chemistry, for which he was awarded the 1932 Nobel Prize. To generalize, chemical technology is not to be thought of as an independent variable, drawing its ideas parasitically from science; rather it is an equal partner contributing as much to the common stock as it draws out.

The Haber–Bosch process was obviously driven by economic, political and military needs. In the 1930s, when the Du Pont corporation succeeded in manufacturing nylon, the consumers felt no need at all to get dressed in clothes made by synthetic fibers. Du Pont had to create a need, which they and other companies eventually did. The polymeric nature of macromolecules was a novel and somewhat controversial scientific insight of the 1920s, when the field was pioneered by the German organic chemist Hermann Staudinger in particular. To turn the insight into profit made a strong research base imperative, and it was with this purpose that Du Pont hired the university-trained chemist Wallace Carothers in 1928. Carothers's research program was "oriented basic research," meaning that it was fundamental research in macromolecules guided by the wish to manufacture commercially useful synthetic fibers. His research resulted in the development of a new polyamide fiber which Du Pont marketed as "nylon" in 1938 and which marked the beginning of the "synthetic revolution."

One should not believe, though, that all advances in the new synthetic industry were based in a planned scientific approach. It is significant that another major success of the early industry, the discovery of polyethylene in the laboratories of ICI in England, was a result of a research program investigating the effects of high pressure on organic materials. The involved chemists were not aiming at finding a new plastic material but happened to do so serendipitously. Although science did not show the way, their approach was thoroughly scientific.

The examples mentioned illustrate certain general features of chemical industry and its relation to scientific chemistry. Whatever the kind of manufactured product, in a commercial chemical-technological process it is of decisive importance that it can be governed and controlled. The aim is not merely to manufacture a certain product, but to gain complete control over the process. Therefore, the factors that govern the reactivity and output of the process must be known, and methods to control and analyze the product must be developed. Technology is about purposeful manipulation of materials. Successful manipulation of tiny units such as atoms and molecules requires scientific knowledge of the nature of matter and the processes of transformation. Contrary to, say, mechanical articles, the chemical units are invisible. For this reason, knowledge of their behavior and means of influencing them is best-obtained through scientific theory and systematic experiments. This does not mean that technical chemistry must necessarily rely on scientific knowledge. The alchemists and technical chemists of the Renaissance were happily unaware of molecules, thermodynamics and

reaction rates, and yet they manufactured many useful substances. But it does mean that the scientific approach has enormous advantages, and that a highly developed and efficient chemical industry cannot be based on empirical rules only. It is not too much to say that modern chemical industry is crucially based on science, although in most cases not the most recent science.

Post-Second World War chemistry has relied heavily on high-technological instrumentation, and in several cases the instruments used in the laboratories had their origin and were shaped by experiences in the industrial sector. For example, infrared spectroscopy – which provides a "fingerprint" of molecules based on their vibrational states – was applied and developed by the petroleum industry in the 1930s and only widely adopted by organic chemists after the war, soon to become indispensable for their scientific research. The instrumentation revolution promoted an idea of "instrumental objectivity" which emphasized cost efficiency and the reduction in the role of human judgment. Starting in analytical chemistry, this kind of objectivity ideal soon spread to a wide range of measurements, from food labels to pollution monitors.

To speak of chemical industry purely in terms of "science" and "technology" is a considerable oversimplification that tends to ignore much of what is specific to chemical engineering. Although manipulation of chemical compounds and reactions is at the heart of most chemical industries, they also deal significantly with physical processes (such as heat exchange and crystallization) and apparatus associated with them. Chemical engineering is not science-based in the traditional sense but better-understood as an independent class of applied science oriented toward industrial processes in general.

Modern chemical industry is characterized not primarily by its products but rather by its processes, that is, the succession of actions – whether physical or chemical – that transform raw materials into a new chemical product. Processes and their conceptualization in terms of "unit operations" are at the heart of chemical engineering. According to the American Arthur D. Little, who introduced the concept in 1915, any chemical manufacturing process can be broken down into a series of discrete physical processes known as unit operations. The number and order of these operations will vary from chemical to chemical, but the variety of manufacturing processes can nevertheless be understood in terms of the same set of building blocks.

Chemical engineering based on the intellectual innovation of unit operations came to dominate the chemical industry after the Second World War and made possible a much more efficient, coordinated and scaled-up production of chemicals. In modern chemical industry, advances in "chemical process software" have been no less important than advances in "chemical material hardware." This also means that scientific competences entering chemical industry have carved out their own niche. They are neither wholly scientific nor wholly technological but a hybrid form of knowledge in which the computer is of greater importance than the glasswares and instruments of the classical laboratory.

#### References and Further Reading

Bhushan, N. and Rosenfeld, S. (2000). *Of Minds and Molecules: New Philosophical Perspectives on Chemistry* (New York: Oxford University Press).

- Furukawa, Y. (1998). *Inventing Polymer Science: Staudinger, Carothers and the Emergence of Macromolecular Chemistry* (University Park, Pa.: Penn State University Press).
- Hounshell, D. A. and Smith, J. K. (1988). *Science and Corporate Strategy: Du Pont R&D, 1902–1980* (New York: Cambridge University Press).
- Mauskopf, S. H. (ed.) (1993). *Chemical Sciences in the Modern World* (University Park, Pa.: Penn State University Press).
- Meyer-Thurow, G. (1982). "The Industrialization of Invention: A Case Study from the German Chemical Industry," *Isis 73*, pp. 363–81.
- Rabkin, Y. M. (1987). "Technological Innovation in Science: The Adoption of Infrared Spectroscopy by Chemists," *Isis 78*, pp. 31–54.
