---
images: []
order: 92
title: Preamble
---

The field of philosophy of technology as a branch of professional philosophy is relatively recent. It is only some three decades old as a flourishing specialty. Traditional branches of philosophy, such as metaphysics and ethics, are almost two and a half millennia old. Philosophy of science as a specialized brand of technical philosophy, by contrast, stems from the second and third decades of the twentieth century. During the nineteenth century a number of scientists, primarily physicists, wrote works specifically dedicated to the philosophy of science. Despite the importance of technology to human life and society throughout human history (and, indeed, prehistory), there has not been a continuous tradition of the philosophy of technology. There have been sporadic major contributions to the field among the classical philosophers. Socrates, Plato and Aristotle discussed the crafts, expertise and *techne*.

Socrates and Plato contrasted the concrete and effective knowledge possessed by craftspeople with the spurious claims to knowledge of ethical and political matters on the part of politicians of the day. On the other hand, Socrates and Plato contrast the narrow, concrete and specialized craft knowledge with the comprehensive wisdom pursued by genuine philosophy. Socrates and Plato considered ethical and political knowledge, when achieved, as genuine theoretical knowledge. Aristotle also contrasted theoretical with practical and productive knowledge. For Aristotle, however, practical wisdom is not itself a kind of theoretical knowledge as Socrates and Plato had claimed. It does not admit the precision of mathematical or scientific knowledge. While Plato held training in mathematics to be an ideal prerequisite for the study of ethics and politics, and in his later "unwritten doctrine" conflated philosophical knowledge with a higher form of knowledge of numbers, Aristotle strongly contrasted practical knowledge, gained from mentors and learned by example, depending on intuitive judgment calls based on life experience, with precise and explicit mathematical knowledge.

Almost two thousand years later Francis Bacon emphasized the role of technology in experimental knowledge and in contributing to the prosperity and welfare of society. Bacon took seriously the importance of craft knowledge in gaining theoretical knowledge of and mastery over nature. In this Bacon differed greatly from the "British empiricists" (Locke, Berkeley, Hume and Mill), who are generally considered his philosophical progeny during the next three centuries, in that the latter concentrated on

the association of ideas based on perceptual knowledge and not on knowledge as based on practical, manipulative activity.

In the nineteenth century Henri de Saint-Simon and August Comte in France, as well as Karl Marx in Germany, devoted attention to the role of technology in the development of society. Comte and Saint-Simon did not focus on the details of particular technologies (though Comte had a fairly detailed knowledge of mathematical physics) but both did make the concept of "industrial society" central to their conceptions of the culmination of historical development and the social structure of contemporary society (Comte being the father of sociology). Marx, who characterized the essence of contemporary society as capitalism rather than as industrialism in general, did, in his later economic works, do analyses of particular technologies with respect to their effects on workers and their contribution to productivity.

Nevertheless, scores of major philosophers in the eighteenth, nineteenth and early twentieth centuries had very little or nothing to say about technology. Even with the growth of early modern science and technology followed by the industrial revolution, the Continental European rationalists and British empiricists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (with the exception of Bacon), despite two centuries of intense concern with theory of knowledge and the nature of knowledge in pure science, had surprisingly little to say specifically about technology. Why was this?

One suggestion is that in the modern era technology has been seen purely and simply as applied science. If one could understand the nature of scientific knowledge, then the problems of philosophy of technology were essentially solved. The direct application of science to technology was seen as largely unproblematic. Furthermore, the main streams of rationalist, empiricist and Enlightenment philosophers right up through the works of the logical positivists saw technology as an almost unalloyed benefit to society. Technology would, following Bacon, contribute to the national health, wealth and welfare. There were no major ethical problems in technology. (Granted, Leonardo da Vinci and Francis Bacon did raise some concerns, but most of the major early modern philosophers did not.) The theory of scientific knowledge and political theory offered issues and problems, but once these were solved there were no problems left solely involving technology.

It is true that from the end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth century the Romantic tradition included questioning and criticism of technology and emphasis on the harms of technology, but even here the major writers concerned with the harmfulness of technology were Romantic poets, novelists and literary essayists, not the Romantic philosophers such as Fichte and Schelling. Similarly, the actual Luddite movement was a practical, political one of industrial sabotage, not a primarily theoretical movement. Those nineteenth-century writers who have sometimes been called honorary "Luddites" for their negative assessment of the industrial revolution were for the most part poets, art critics and essayists who sometimes presented philosophical ideas, but who are not included in the canonical history of philosophy.

In Germany, defeat in the First World War led to a popular wave of disillusionment with technology and a neo-Romantic interest in "return to nature" in the German Youth Movement. However, in the rest of Western Europe, Britain and the United States, it would seem that only after the Second World War, especially because of nuclear bombs and the nuclear arms race, were large numbers of people willing to entertain the idea that technology might be at least as harmful as helpful to humanity. Similarly, although there had been criticisms of the harmful effects of technology on the environment, particularly among the Romantics, mass popular concern about negative impacts of technology on the environment did not surface until the 1960s and 1970s. Thus nuclear weapons and widely reported ecological side-effects of technology made reflection on the ethical balance of the benefits and risks of technology a widespread phenomenon. With development of biotechnology, particularly the possibility of genetic modification of humans, and concomitant speculation about engineering human nature itself, intensified concern about this seemingly more intimate and "essential" intrusion of technology into humanity grew.

There was a further barrier to the widespread and intense development of philosophy of technology within philosophy for the first two-thirds of the twentieth century and beyond. Philosophy of technology is a field of philosophy that involves a wide variety of branches of philosophy. Philosophy of technology involves philosophy of science, theory of knowledge, philosophy of action, ethics, political philosophy, and may involve aesthetics, metaphysics and philosophy of religion as well. Within analytical philosophy, focus on philosophy of science and focus on ethics have involved disjoint classes of specialists. At least into the 1980s, most ethicists often appealed to a somewhat dated philosophy of science, if they appealed to it at all. Philosophers of science, with a few exceptions, have not worked on problems of ethics. The interactions between political philosophy and philosophy of science have not been quite so exclusive, but have generally been by no means intimate for most practitioners.

Another feature of philosophy of technology may have impeded its earlier development. Not only does the field demand simultaneous engagement in a diversity of branches of philosophy, but also contributors to philosophy of technology have come from a number of schools of philosophy. These diverse schools for most of the twentieth century did not communicate with one another. Often they did not respect or take seriously one another's style and product. The split between analytic and Continental philosophy began around the turn of the twentieth century. After the early exchanges between the phenomenologist Edmund Husserl and the grandfather of much logical analytical philosophy, Gottlob Frege, for instance, or the early mutual and co-respective awareness of Martin Heidegger and Rudolf Carnap, despite the harsh criticisms of the former by the latter, analytic and Continental philosophy remained mutually incommunicado for at least three-quarters of the century. There were some exceptions to this, as in the reviews of Husserl by the leader of the Vienna Circle logical positivists, Moritz Schlick, and reviews of the works of the Vienna Circle by the early Frankfurt School critical theorists such as Max Horkheimer and Herbert Marcuse (although these crossschool reviews were uniformly negative). Anglo-American analytical and linguistic philosophers tended to dismiss much of German and French philosophy as obscurantist, pretentious and meaningless, while professionals in the mainstream of Continental philosophy often dismissed analytical philosophy as narrow, trivial and irrelevant to the great issues of the age.

Only in the last few decades of the twentieth century had there begun to be analytic commentaries on major twentieth-century Continental philosophers such as Heidegger and Husserl, while a number of Continental philosophers, such as Jürgen Habermas, Karl-Otto Apel and Ernst Tugendhat, took seriously and grappled with Anglo-American linguistic philosophy. Scandinavian and Dutch philosophers, dominated by neither German nor British traditions, were able to make fruitful use of both traditions earlier than their German and British counterparts. In recent decades in the United States there have been a number of philosophers occupied with various projects of "bridgebuilding" between analytical and Continental approaches.

There are contributions to philosophy of technology not only in the analytical and linguistic vein, as well as from the phenomenological, existential and hermeneutic traditions; there have also been further contributions from British social constructionists, French postmodernists and American pragmatists. During the last decade there has been a surprising renewal of interest in the work of the early-twentieth-century Anglo-American process philosopher Alfred North Whitehead among social constructionists and French actor-network theorists such as Donna Haraway, Bruno Latour, Andrew Pickering and Paul Virilio.

The twenty-first century shows strong evidence of the overcoming of these disciplinary and scholastic barriers, as exemplified by the works in following sections of this *Companion*. The old disjunction of philosophy of science and moral philosophy, as well as the older divisions of the various schools of twentieth-century philosophy, is in the course of being transcended in much of the best contemporary work.

By forcing the integration of ethics and political philosophy with epistemology and philosophy of science, as well as inviting the mutual employment and combination of the methods of logical and linguistic analysis with phenomenology, hermeneutics, social constructionism and process philosophy, philosophy of technology will move from being a marginal and neophyte specialty to playing a central role in the cross-pollination of both subject fields and methods of contemporary philosophy leading to a reunited world philosophy community.

### Philosophy of Science and Philosophy of Technology

Both analytic and Continental philosophy of science are integrated into contemporary philosophy of technology. Within Anglo-American philosophy of science, the postpositivist currents associated with Thomas Kuhn and several others opened various avenues to the analysis and evaluation of technologies that had not been open to approaches beholden to the logical positivist account of science. Just as the mathematical logic-based early work of Ludwig Wittgenstein, partially misinterpreted, was appealed to by the original Vienna Circle logical positivists, the later, ordinary-language-based work of Wittgenstein influenced the work of Thomas Kuhn, Norwood Hanson, Stephen Toulmin and a number of other post-positivist philosophers of science. Although these writers of the late 1950s and early 1960s did not originally emphasize the extra-logical social and cultural influences on science, the more contextual and non-formalistic approach of the post-positivists allowed the consideration of non-scientific political, gender and other influences on scientific theories. Although Thomas Kuhn did not develop the occasional brief references to social influences on science in his work, the British social constructivist sociologists of scientific knowledge did so during the next decade.

A weakness of much of the immediate reaction against logical positivism of the followers of the later Wittgenstein mentioned above was over-emphasis on theory, even

though the conception of theory allowed the broadening of "theory" to include ideological and cultural influences. What Don Ihde and Davis Baird independently called "instrumental realism" shifts the focus from purely intellectual theory to the instrumentation and practical means of experimental investigation. Ian Hacking, Peter Galison and others have helped reorient philosophy of science toward the production of instrumental "effects" and imaging. Don Ihde has further integrated this work with a hermeneutics within science. (See discussion of hermeneutics below as well as Ihde's entries on hermeneutics and imaging technology in this section.)

### Phenomenology and Technology

Phenomenology is the description of experience. Franz Brentano contributed the notion of intentionality of acts of consciousness, always directed toward an object, but Edmund Husserl was the major influence on twentieth-century phenomenology. Although most of those who appealed to Husserl as philosophical mentor focused on issues in description of everyday life, ethics and religion, Husserl himself began from training in mathematics and psychology, and returned in his later work to reflection on physical science. Husserl did a dissertation on the calculus of variations under the leading nineteenth-century mathematical analyst Karl Weierstrass and continued with studies in psychology under Carl Stumpf.

Husserl's description of experience contrasted with the atomistic analysis of the British empiricists and many of the logical positivists. Rather than portraying experience as consisting of atomic sense data or sensations, Husserl described the field of consciousness as containing organizing wholes and containing horizons, both outer (which give a sense of the extension of the field beyond what is immediately in consciousness) and inner (potentially yielding detail beyond that initially evident). Husserl introduced the phenomenological *epoche* or bracketing in which one suspends judgment concerning the existence or nonexistence of the objects of experience and the notion of eidetic intuition of essences in experience.

Husserl later turned to the analysis of Galileo's "idealization" of ordinary lived experience (lifeworld) and the subsequent mistaken identification of reality with our idealized abstractions rather than with our lived experience. This later work of Husserl opened many paths in the phenomenology of science. With respect to its usefulness for philosophy of technology, this later work of Husserl shares a deficiency with the original post-positivistic philosophy of science in its overemphasis on theory and insufficient attention to instrumentation. Don Ihde has called Husserl's Galileo a Galileo without the telescope.

Maurice Merleau-Ponty, who, along with his fellow Frenchman Jean-Paul Sartre, is sometimes called by American followers an "existential phenomenologist," developed the conceptions of the later Husserl. Merleau-Ponty's elaboration on the conception of the "lived body," a body neither the purely mechanistic body of external, physical analysis, nor the subjective conscious mind of introspection, but the body as experienced has much potentiality for the account of technological activity and relationships between humans and their machines. Hubert Dreyfus has made fruitful use of this concept as well as of Husserl's account of the field of consciousness in his critique of artificial intelligence.

Martin Heidegger, student of Husserl, and one of the most influential philosophers of the twentieth century, transformed the rather Platonic conceptions of essential intuition in Husserl's phenomenology into a more concrete, existential account of human existence. Heidegger also gave equal emphasis to the account of objects as pragmatic means through which we act and work, along with the more traditional account of objects present to hand as detachedly observed and independent of us. Heidegger also enriched phenomenology not only with concrete existential themes but also with the centrality of the interpretation of meaning.

In the later works of Heidegger, in contrast to those of Husserl, technology itself becomes a central theme. According to Heidegger, technology characterizes the nature of modern society in the way that nature did the world of the Greeks or religion was central to the Middle Ages. Technology structures modern humans' entire comportment to the world, turning all objects into resources, and the centrality of modern technology makes all our thinking oriented to instrumentality and control of nature even at the most rarified levels of philosophical reflection. Experiences of the world in a non-technological manner become much more rare and fragile than in previous epochs. Albert Borgmann has emphasized how we may treasure and maintain the "focal" and communal experiences that free us from the technological enframing of the rest of life.
