---
images: []
order: 94
title: Marxism, Critical Theory and Technology
---

Marxism and neo-Marxism are another major component of contemporary philosophy of technology, both as a source of ideas and as an object of criticism. Marx's later economic writings contain detailed discussion of the effect of factory *machinery* on workers. Ironically, "orthodox" Marxists of the half century after Marx did not greatly elaborate on these specifically technological inquiries of Marx, though they emphasized the technologically deterministic aspects of Marx's account of history. Much of the neo-Hegelian rediscovery of the dialectical and social constructivist aspects of Marxism in

the first half of the twentieth century, so-called "Western Marxism," concentrated on aesthetics and literary criticism rather than on the economy and technology. Critical Theory was an exception to this de-emphasis on technology within neo-Marxism. However, the critical theorists tended to treat technology and technological reason as a monolithic unity. (This was true of other mid-twentieth-century writers such as Jacques Ellul as well.) Andrew Feenberg corrects this tendency of critical theory to treat technology as an undifferentiated repressive phenomenon, examining particular technologies with regard to emancipatory as well as repressive potentials.

### Social Constructivism

Another trend in the philosophy of technology is that influenced by the social construction of technology (SCOT). The social construction approach originated in the social construction of scientific knowledge. The constructionist tradition in philosophy goes back to Thomas Hobbes and Giambattista Vico. Both of these early modern philosophers claimed that we know best that which we ourselves make. Vico emphasized mathematics and history as human products while Hobbes emphasized the role of social contract in the constitution of society and of science and definitional convention in the constitution of scientific knowledge. The next major contributor to constructivism was Immanuel Kant in the late eighteenth century. Kant claimed that we constitute our knowledge through the application of categories of the mind applied to the manifold of sense experience. Johann Gottlieb Fichte radicalized Kant's constructivism by claiming that the mind does not simply organize and systematize the inputs of sense experience but posits or creates the objects of knowledge. In 1923, György Lukács combined the constructive trend of German idealism with Marxism. Rather than the forms of mind or reason as such, it is the forms of economic production that structure knowledge and worldviews. In the 1960s the social constitution of knowledge was revived in a number of forms. In the 1970s this approach was applied to the sociology of scientific knowledge by the British social constructivists of science.

Social construction of technology is in some ways less controversial than the social construction of scientific knowledge. There are three aspects or levels of constructivism. One is the construction of the physical instruments of science and technology. A second is the construction of knowledge. The third is the construction of natural objects and facts. The notion that hypotheses and theories are constructed by knowers is not in itself controversial, especially since the general rejection of the earlier British empiricist claim that theories emerge automatically from inductive observations. The addition of the term "social" to constructivism emphasizes the widely accepted view that science is a social enterprise, a product of the scientific community. The most controversial thesis of the social construction of science is that the natural objects and/or facts of science are socially constructed. If by "fact" one means what is accepted as a fact by the scientific community, this thesis is not controversial. It is only when there is a slippage between fact in this sense and fact as an independently existing state of affairs that the thesis of the social construction of facts becomes controversial. Instrumental realists such as Ian Hacking point out that in experimental physics "effects" are produced by instrumentation. The artifacts of technology are, literally, physically constructed.

What may be more controversial in SCOT would be the claim that what counts as "efficient" in technology is itself socially constructive and is not simply a matter of inputs and outputs of physical energy.
