---
images: []
order: 95
title: Pragmatism and Technology
---

Pragmatism has been the distinctive American contribution to philosophy. In contrast to previous philosophies that evaluated claims in terms of principles or axioms that logically justify them or in terms of perceptual data on which they are based, pragmatism evaluates claims in terms of consequences for action. Charles S. Peirce initially presented pragmatism as a principle for the evaluation of meaning and had a different characterization of truth. When William James used the pragmatic principle as a definition of truth, and understood truth as results in the broadest possible sense, Peirce dissociated himself from James's account by calling his own approach "pragmaticism." John Dewey developed an account of evaluation of claims in some ways closer to Peirce's but did use the pragmatic maxim as a means of evaluating truth as well as meaning. Dewey at one point suggested that, since the term "truth" is so closely associated with the classical notion of correspondence with pre-existing, independent facts, one should give up the term "truth" for "warranted assertability."

During the middle third of the twentieth century in the USA the émigré Central European logical empiricists became allied with the pragmatists on many issues. Pragmatist criticisms of logical empiricism, such as those of W. V. O. Quine and Wilfrid Sellars borrowed theses from pragmatism to criticize the logical positivist criterion of meaning in terms of verification by sense observations, but were in philosophical style and interests far closer to analytical philosophy than to the classical pragmatists. They lacked the broad concerns with social problems of industrial society and democracy expressed in the writings of Dewey. Richard Rorty expressed sympathy with Dewey but turned in the direction of what many see as relativism and Continental literary postmodernism.

Among the classical pragmatists it is John Dewey whose writings deal most with themes of interest to the philosopher of technology. Peirce focused on the physical science and philosophy of mathematics, and had little to say about social problems and issues. James concerned himself with psychology in his early work and religious belief and commitment as well as general epistemology in his later work. In contrast, issues related to or applicable to technology pervade Dewey's writings. Larry Hickman has been a contemporary philosopher concerned with reviving interest in Dewey on technology and emphasizing the value of Dewey's views for the reform of technology.

The very term "instrumentalism" that Dewey used to characterize his approach shows his affinity to the philosophy of technology. For Dewey, not just physical tools, but concepts and methods are instruments. Dewey's conception of technology as the evaluation of tools and techniques (which include ideas and concepts, habits and institutions) is extremely broad. For Dewey there is no contrast between technology and the rest of culture.

Dewey wishes to treat all the traditional philosophical dichotomies, fact and value, mind and body, thought and action, as poles in continua, or phases of activities, not as absolute distinctions of kind. This aspect of Dewey fits well with the philosophy of technology's need to deal with ethics as well as science, concepts as well as theory of action.

Dewey has been criticized by European critical theorists and by hermeneutic phenomenologists for excessive optimism concerning the future of technological and industrial society. However, Dewey's optimism is not uncritical, and his emphasis on revision and reform as part of the very nature of technology is a useful corrective to the portrayal of technology as all-encompassing, uncontrollable, dominating and oppressive that is found in much twentieth-century German writing about technology.

### Toward an Integrated Philosophy of Technology

Philosophy of technology has been approached through a variety of philosophical perspectives and "schools." These include post-positivist philosophy of science, phenomenology, hermeneutics, social constructivism, critical theory and pragmatism discussed above.

One of the impacts of the philosophy of technology is to encourage and, in the context of problem-solving, in some cases to force the integration of various philosophical approaches. In jointly deploying the methods of these various approaches to deal with philosophy of technology, the shared features of many of these schools of philosophy become more evident.

One feature of the various schools of recent philosophy applied to the philosophy of technology is their sensitivity to the issue of context. Ordinary language philosophy, in contrast to earlier logical positivism and formal-logic-oriented analytical philosophy, emphasizes the context of utterances. Deweyan pragmatism likewise is a thoroughgoing contextualism.

Another feature of the philosophies deployed in the philosophy of technology is the emphasis on the role of language and meaning as structuring perceptual experience. Ordinary language philosophy of the later Wittgenstein stands to the earlier logical positivism and empiricism as hermeneutics and the hermeneutic phenomenology of the later Heidegger stand to earlier phenomenology, in that both emphasize the inextricable relatedness of linguistic meaning to the description of experience.

The emphasis on action rather than passive apprehension in knowledge has been central to both Marxism and pragmatism. Furthermore the understanding of meaning in pragmatism and in ordinary language philosophy is one that emphasizes use in practice rather than correspondence to abstract entities. One asks in pragmatism not what abstract terms are but what they do. Similarly the slogan "meaning as use" has been central to ordinary language philosophy.

A variety of other approaches, such as conceptual role semantics, are more precise variations on this approach to meaning in use.

Similarly an emphasis on the role of embodiment in human life and knowledge distinguishes a number of the mid-to-late-twentieth-century approaches to philosophy from earlier approaches emphasizing the dualism of mind and body. The lived body of Merleau-Ponty and Dewey's emphasis on technologies as extensions of embodiment are just two of these emphases on embodiment. Michel Foucault's focus on the power

of and control over bodies and feminist philosophy's critique of the neglect of embodiment in classical early modern philosophy are other developments of this theme.

Another turn in the treatment of knowledge and action shared by a number of the philosophies made use of in discussing technology is the social nature of knowledge. Marxism, critical theory and social constructivism are among those approaches that most obviously emphasize the social dimensions of knowledge. Ordinary language philosophy emphasizes the social nature of language, and pragmatism incorporates the social nature of knowledge. Emphasis on the role of the scientific community in post-Kuhnian philosophy of science is another example of the inclusion of the social dimension of knowledge. There is now widespread awareness of, although disagreement about, the role of gender and culture in the formulation of theories and norms of action.

The importance of construction of social arrangements and of knowledge is another theme shared by several of the philosophies we have examined. It is most evident in the very name of social constructionism, but pragmatism in its Deweyan form is also a constructionism. This construction was previously presented as a purely mental construction as in Kant, but the philosophy of technology has brought to the fore the role of literal physical construction.

Another area of integration of approaches is the way that the philosophy of technology forces use of both descriptive and normative or evaluative considerations to give adequate accounts of technological artifacts and projects. Developments in postpositivist philosophy of science and social constructionist accounts of science have foregrounded the role of norms of science in knowledge, both with respect to the norms of knowledge and the ethics of scientific practice. Since technological systems incorporate both physical apparatus, rules, and human organization and skills, accounts of technology must characterize the cultural, political and moral norms involved in technological developments and the controversies concerning them.

The shared features of the various approaches to philosophy utilized in the philosophy of technology may partially answer the question of why the field of philosophy of technology is so recent, developing centuries after the scientific and industrial revolutions. Early modern philosophy, such as that of the rationalists and empiricists, sharply separated the dualities of mind and body, theory and action, individual and social, descriptive and normative, that needed to be integrated or overcome for an adequate philosophy of technology. It is only in the last two-thirds of the twentieth century that philosophies such as ordinary language philosophy, hermeneutic phenomenology, and social constructionism developed. These philosophies initially did not show much interest in technology as such, and it took further decades for their application to technology as subject matter.
