---
images: []
order: 98
title: ROBERT E. INNIS
---

The fundamental premise of a semiotic approach to technology is that technology can be analyzed with the conceptual tools of semiotics, the general theory of signs. Semiotics has as its goal to explore the "logic" of signs and the "factors" of semiosis, the production and interpretations of signs. Signs are the carriers or supports of semiosis, which is itself a complex phenomenon. Signs, in the most general sense, are meaning-carriers, while semiosis, which relies upon signs, is meaning-making, on both the productive and receptive side. Signs are produced, intentionally or unintentionally, and they are interpreted, both operatively and thematically. The possibility of a semiotics of technology is dependent upon the successful application of the semiotically informed category of *meaning* to technology as such on both the structural and the process sides. A primary concern is whether semiotics is being used to model and hence to interpret technology or whether technology is itself an intrinsically semiotic phenomenon. This is a kind of ambivalence that, rather than being theoretically debilitating, can be extremely enlightening when we try to grasp technology in its root structures.

Both semiosis and "technics" are dependent upon a fundamental materiality. They are through and through material processes. While signs are embodiments of meaning, tools, in the broadest sense of that term, are embodiments of technico-practical intentions and goals. Although the ability to embody meanings and the effective conditions of human practical actions in various material arrays – that is, signs, tools and models – supplies essential *enabling* conditions for the circuit of human activity, widening, expanding and transforming it, on both the level of semiosis and the level of technics, material conditions also *constrain* the range and types of activities. Language, the species-specific mark of humans, is not an immaterial phenomenon, any more than the derivative activities such as art and music are. Whether it is puffs of air, complex gestural and finger movements, or marks on some sort of semi-permanent surface, language and other human symbol systems have to appear in some material form. Likewise, a hammer or a knife, certainly paradigmatic tools, or the great auxiliary apparatuses of technology such as containers and machines, cannot be constructed out of papier-mâché nor can we create an outdoor statue out of gelatin. Semiosis and technics, in all their forms, must be *supported* in some stable and semipermanent way, subject clearly to the conditions of entropy.

Semiotics has for the most part developed along a number of predominantly parallel and only occasionally intersecting paths, and has used quite different conceptual frameworks. Jakob von Uexküll developed within the context of a biologically based theory of meaning a schema of the functional circle of human activity. Charles S. Peirce, the American polymath, developed a largely philosophical framework for semiotics with his differentiation of signs into the three great classes of icons, indexes and symbols, based on just how our signs are related to the objects they make known. Ferdinand de Saussure, in his *Course in General Linguistics*, developed a fundamentally linguistic model, with the presupposition that its analytical apparatus, focused on language as a dynamic system of differences, would apply to other semiotic – or, in his terms, "semiological" – phenomena. Ernst Cassirer, whose *Philosophy of Symbolic Forms* is one of the central texts of the tradition of philosophical semiotics, developed a model based on his triadic schematization of the forms of sense into three levels: the expressive, the representational, and the pure signifying, all the while, in his later work, also seeing the relevance of Uexküll's work.

These different frameworks bear upon the problem of a semiotics of technology in rather different ways. They lay quite different grids over technology as a total phenomenon and highlight quite different features of technological structures and processes. But each framework has its own advantages for the semiotic analysis of technology.

Uexküll's functional circle displays the "circuit of meaning" of any organism *qua tale*. It is extremely important, as heuristic schema, for the proper understanding of the possibility of a semiotics of technology. The organism, on Uexküll's account, is defined by a deep receptivity to perceptual stimuli and by varying degrees and types of reactions that change the originating stimuli in a constant dynamic spiral. The path from the meaning-bearing object to the organism Uexküll calls the "receptor arc." The path from the organism to the meaning-bearing and meaning-receiving object Uexküll calls the "effector arc." Generalizing from this schema, we can distinguish between "perceptual technologies" and "effector technologies" all the while acknowledging the intimate relations between the two. In fact, the "perceptual" and the "effector" are rather "dimensions" than separate spheres, since the organism is never merely passive or purely active, never merely interpreting or materially constructing. Uexküll's revolutionary insight is that we should think of these arcs in semiotic terms, that is, in terms of meaning and of differential cue-carriers. The receptor arc is marked by the grasp of "differences" in the perceptual field. While other organisms are for the most part confined to predetermined fields of cues, humans are open to a vast array of "articulate" cues, having not an *Umwelt* but a *Welt*, that is, not an "environment" but a "world." This human world is an "open world," permeated by articulate, exosomatic systems that inform and embody perception, in the broad sense of that term. This world is constituted by the material and semiotic *results* of human constructive action, which introduce vast systems of differences into the natural and the social world. These "effected differences" are themselves perceived by the organism in a continuous and ever-expanding spiral.

A semiotic analysis of technology is hence faced with understanding, in semiotic terms, what types of cue-carriers are circulating and are produced in this semio-technical spiral and what their relations to one another are. Peirce, Saussure and Cassirer offer three differently configured sets of analytical tools for developing a fine-grained semiotic analysis of technology.

Peirce distinguished three different ways anything functioning as a sign could make an object known to an interpreter or sign-user. The sign–object relation can be based on resemblances, the resulting sign type being an *icon*. If the relation is based on some sort of physical or existential connection, including a part–whole relation, the resulting sign-type is an *index*. The *symbol*, the third type of sign, exemplified paradigmatically by human language, is based on purely conventional relation between sign and object. Peirce's triadic schema allows us to distinguish iconic, indexical and symbolic dimensions of technology. The paradoxical upshot of such a distinction is that, in effect, semiosis is assimilated to technology, to productive activity rather than technology being assimilated, as such, to semiosis.

*Iconic* technologies, on the Peircean interpretation, are all those systems that rely upon resemblances, including, but not restricted to, all technologies of the image. Images are not just interpreted; they are also produced. The semiotics of technology must, therefore, concern itself with both the creative techniques for the production of images and the contents or forms of presentation of these systems. Images convey messages and have a distinctive rhetoric. *Indexical* technologies rely upon interventions, upon systems of action and reaction. We not only read the signs of nature and try to transform them into systems of effective action; these systems also make a material difference in the world. Science is distinguished from technology here by its essentially representational interest, which is not, however, absolutely separate from intervening. But, while the point of science is cognitive, the point of technology is effective control and exploitation. *Symbolic* technologies are exemplified first and foremost by language and mathematical systems, which, in fact, make the other two systems distinctively human and intentional. Languages and all notational systems, including algebraic and other mathematical forms, have to be developed just like tools, machines and other apparatuses have to be developed.

The pivotal point, however, is that on Peirce's account each type of sign gives rise in the interpreter to a distinct type of "interpretant," which he calls the "proper significate effect of a sign." No technology, in its entrance into the functional circle of human action, leaves the interpreter or agent untouched. The aim of iconic technologies is to establish deep affective bonds in, to "qualify" the affective field of, interpretive agents, to establish "shared qualities" of feeling by inducing and shaping distinct forms of participatory presencing and attunement. Indexical technologies aim at establishing systems of action and reaction, of reciprocal relations, between humans and nature, which Peirce calls "energetic interpretants," since they exploit human and non-human energies for an effective action and end. The proper significate effect of symbolic technologies is the establishing of a concept, thought or idea. Furthermore, if we follow the semiotic line drawn by Peirce, we can clearly see that technology has a *syntactic* dimension, which involves the relations of tools, instruments and processes to one another, a *semantic* dimension, which traces their different ways of relating us to the world, and a *rhetorical* dimension, which defines their relationship to us, the practitioners of technics as materially embodied semiosis.

Saussure's linguistic model also has a clear and powerful bearing on the semiotics of technology. For Saussure, language was first and foremost a system, a structure, defined by internal relations of its units. Each unit in the system had a "place" defined not by its material structure but by its relations to all the other units. These units, like pieces on a board, allowed only certain "moves" to be made – certain types of game-actions, so to speak. This "language-game" analogy is a powerful model for the analysis of technology. But even more powerful is the doctrine of the two axes of language: the axis of selection and the axis of combination, or, with different emphases, the paradigmatic and the syntagmatic. Technological systems have selected and combined elements from the natural and humanly constructed worlds. As to selection, at each point in time there are only a limited set of possible units that can be chosen and used to play the game of technology, to make a move on the great board of nature. Their combination, as a state of affairs, gives us the technological system. But the dynamic nature of technological inventions constantly gives us new units to combine, and the rules of combination are constantly changing, as is the system itself. Technology is a kind of game we play with nature in which not only the pieces but also the rules themselves are in perpetual transformation. But, on the Saussurean position, technological systems are *meaningful*. Killing instruments, for example, are multiple. A bow and arrow can be substituted for by a crossbow, which itself can be substituted for by a pistol or a rifle, which can be substituted for by a cannon or a machine gun, and these by a dynamitepowered bomb, itself then being substituted for by a nuclear or biological device. Each addition of a unit to select from changes the relation of all the other pieces in the system. Technology is a dynamic relational system, self-mediating internally and mediating us to and with the world. We are to see technology as a system of possible substitutions and combinations – as a continuous stream of technological "utterances," so to speak. The system makes possible the stream of technological "events" that make up the history of technology. Saussure offers us a "structuralist" model of technology. We can only understand any technological phenomenon by seeing it in the system(s) to which it belongs and its differences from other phenomena.

However, while Saussure thinks of language as a system without positive terms – that is, language is a purely formal system – it is clear that technology is not purely formal. The phonetics/phonology distinction, which underlies much of the modern model of language, could, however, be used to mitigate such an objection to some degree. Technology selects from out of all the possible transformations of matter only those which are significant for accomplishing a specific end. It looks for relevant differences in the material world. More generally, in our attempts to understand technology from the point of view of semiotics, we should ask not only about the actual nature and transformations of materials, but what is significant or formally defining in any new technological invention. New technological units or placeholders in the system are not to be defined only materially but in terms of a new "logic." Radio and television are not just variations of information technologies at a distance, as Marshall McLuhan showed. They are logically different units. Television changed the system in semiotically novel ways, just as the technology of writing (and of the book) has been differentially changed by the invention of printing and the invention of the computer (and with it the arrival of "the electronic word").

Cassirer insightfully applied his semiotic schematization of the "form worlds" of meaning, which he undertook in his *Philosophy of Symbolic Forms*, to the phenomenon of "technics." The expressive, mythical level of consciousness is paralleled in the domain of technics by a mimetic, participatory phase, rooted in mythic consciousness's subjection of itself to a fundamental wish-world of magic and ritualistic acts. One is, in this phase, "in thrall" to one's tools. The representational level of consciousness is paralleled by an analogical, extending phase wherein every tool is to be seen as an externalization of the hand or other bodily organ and processes. What is known as "organ-projection" becomes the key both to the development and the interpretation of technics. The logic of the body, on this level, defines the concrete logic of technics. The pure signifying level of consciousness for Cassirer involves a fundamental "transparency" of signs. It is paralleled in technics by the rise and functioning of a purely abstract or "symbolic" phase that transcends or supersedes, either in scale, speed or inner form, the organic limits of human being-in-the-world. The progressive "dematerialization" of the sign charted in Cassirer's semiotic phenomenology, its abandonment of intuitive supports, is matched by a progressive dematerialization of the body and its extensions in technics. The hinge of Cassirer's position is the thesis that the conceptual–linguistic– semiotic "grasping" of the world is paralleled by an isomorphic material grasping through the medium of effective action. Form-giving runs on these two parallel and at times intertwining paths, and occurs on an arc running from the utterly concrete to the utterly abstract.

A semiotic approach to technology, consequently, supplies powerful analytical tools and offers fresh insights into technology as a distinctively human phenomenon. It does not merely offer sets of formal models, but asks us to explore how our embodiment in technology involves not just a semiotic biasing of perception on the "modal" or "access structure" level but also the mediation of novel contents, which have been made possible by the new media, in every sense of that term. Hence, the semiotics of technology can take its place alongside the historical, the ethical, the political, and other frameworks of analysis and valuation.

#### References and Further Reading

Classic texts of semiotics and a discussion of their bearing on the semiotics of technology are found in the following two books, with copious references to collateral materials.

Innis, R. (1985). *Semiotics: An Introductory Anthology* (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press). Innis, R. (2002). *Pragmatism and the Forms of Sense: Language, Perception, Technics* (University Park, Pa.: Penn State University Press).
