---
images: []
order: 102
title: Critical Theories of Technology
---

Critical theories of technology argue that technologies are not separate from society but are adapted to specific social and political systems. Technologies are thus not neutral tools, because they are implicated in the socio-political order they serve and contribute to shaping, nor can they be characterized by a singular "essence of technology" because they evolve historically along with other aspects of society. Just as institutions, laws and customs can be changed by human action, so can technological systems. The substantivist idea of the "autonomy" of technology describes at most certain large-scale technical systems. These systems possess what Thomas Hughes calls "momentum." However, autonomy in this sense is a contingent feature of technology, not the essential property it appears to be in the theories of Jacques Ellul and Martin Heidegger.

Critical theories of technology are not new. Marx and Dewey each offer representative versions. Nevertheless, some form of instrumentalism continues to prevail in common sense. Hence the scandal provoked in 1964 by Marcuse's claim that "Technological rationality has become political rationality." By 1980, when Langdon Winner published his classic article asserting that "artifacts have politics," the critical view was still controversial but it had gained wider currency. Today it seems self-evident to most students of technology in the humanities and social sciences. The reason to formulate a general

Table 24.1

| Technology is            | Autonomous          | Humanly controlled     |
|--------------------------|---------------------|------------------------|
| Neutral                  | Determinism         | Instrumentalism        |
| (complete separation     | (e.g. modernization | (liberal faith in      |
| of means and ends)       | theory)             | progress)              |
| Value-laden              | Substantivism       | Critical Theory        |
| (means form a way of     | (means and ends     | (choice of alternative |
| life that includes ends) | linked in systems)  | means-ends systems)    |

concept of critical theory of technology is thus primarily to enable students of technology to identify their commonalities in opposition to the prevailing popular view and, hopefully, to contribute to altering that view.

Making the unity of approach of these various theories explicit has a political context and implication. From the late 1960s on, controversy and reform projects gradually undermined the technocratic faith in expertise that characterized attitudes in the postwar period. With the rise of the environmental movement, the struggle of AIDS patients for access to experimental drugs, and the re-invention of the Internet by its users as a communication medium, the political dimensions of technology became clear. In this context the notion of a critical approach to technology began to make headway.

In Table 24.1, I have represented the relation between critical theories of technology and the alternatives in a chart with two axes – a vertical axis corresponding to the relation of technology to values, and a horizontal axis corresponding to the relation of technology to human action.

My own critical theory of technology is a particular application of this general perspective. It derives from Marcuse's version of Frankfurt School Critical Theory. Marcuse argued that the existing modern technology forms a quasi-dystopian system that might be changed through political action. Marcuse's writings are very abstract, but I have concretized his position through a constructivist approach to the analysis of specific technologies, such as computer-mediated communication and experimentation on human subjects. Critical theory of technology thus represents a unique synthesis of ideas drawn from the Frankfurt School and contemporary science and technology studies.

### Technology and Democracy

Critical theory of technology is a political theory of modernity with a normative dimension. It belongs to a tradition extending from Marx to Foucault and Habermas according to which advances in the formal claims of human rights take center stage while in the background centralization of ever more powerful public institutions and private organizations imposes an authoritarian social order.

#### andrew feenberg

Marx attributed this trajectory to the capitalist rationalization of production. Today it marks many institutions besides the factory and every modern political system, including so-called socialist systems. This trajectory arose from the problems of command over a disempowered and deskilled labor force; but everywhere masses are organized – whether it be Foucault's prisons or Habermas's public sphere – the same pattern prevails. Technological design and development is shaped by this pattern as the material base of a distinctive social order. Marcuse would later point to a "project" as the basis of what he called rather confusingly "technological rationality." Releasing technology from this project is a democratic political task.

In accordance with this general line of thought, critical theory of technology regards technologies as an environment rather than as a collection of tools. We live today with and even within technologies that determine our way of life. Along with the constant pressures to build centers of power, many other social values and meanings are inscribed in technological design. A hermeneutics of technology must make explicit the meanings implicit in the devices we use and the rituals they script. Social histories of technologies such as the bicycle, artificial lighting or firearms have made important contributions to this type of analysis. Critical theory of technology attempts to build a methodological approach on the lessons of these histories.

As an environment, technologies shape their inhabitants. In this respect, they are comparable to laws and customs. Each of these institutions can be said to represent those who live under their sway through privileging certain dimensions of their human nature. Laws of property represent the interest in ownership and control. Customs such as parental authority represent the interest of childhood in safety and growth. Similarly, the automobile represents its users in so far as they are interested in mobility. Interests such as these constitute the version of human nature sanctioned by society.

This notion of representation does not imply an eternal human nature. The concept of nature as non-identity in the Frankfurt School suggests an alternative. On these terms, nature is what lies at the limit of history, at the point at which society loses the capacity to imprint its meanings on things and control them effectively. The reference here is, of course, not to the nature of natural science, but to the lived nature in which we find ourselves and which we are. This nature reveals itself as that which cannot be totally encompassed by the machinery of society. For the Frankfurt School, human nature, in all its transcending force, emerges out of a historical context as that context is limned in illicit joys, struggles and pathologies. We can perhaps admit a less romantic and more Hegelian conception in which those dimensions of human nature recognized by society are also granted theoretical legitimacy. This view converges with the emphasis on the development of human capacities in the work of Amartya Sen.

Technological representation becomes salient when individuals find that important aspects of their humanity are not well served by the technological environment. Then controversies and protests arise, as in the case of laws or customs considered unjust or outmoded by those they govern. Controversies aim to alter technical designs to ensure better representation of more aspects of the humanity of users and in some cases victims of technology. Struggles over technology thus resemble political struggles in important respects. And in fact, in the contemporary world, struggles over technology are often the most important political struggles.

Yet, because the foundations of our political philosophies and arrangements were elaborated in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, there is still a tendency to distinguish sharply between politics and technology, the one supposedly based on rights and values, the other on scientific knowledge. In reality, the political consensus is largely shaped by the available technological form of life rather than rational argumentation, and all the scientific knowledge in the world will not get an engineer from the general idea of a function to a concrete device. The many technically underdetermined aspects of design must be decided by reference to social principles and demands. This situation must be more widely understood to bring technology into the public sphere where it increasingly belongs.

The blindness of political theory to technology blunts its critical force. Modern societies offer ever more technical powers to those with money and governmental authority. As a consequence, democracy is reduced to a reflection of the media and political manipulation. All too often this situation is regarded as an inevitable consequence of modernity. But, for Critical Theory, the truth of the present can only be understood from the standpoint of its potentialities, the alternative it both makes possible and suppresses. From that standpoint, it is clear that modern societies will only be able to realize their democratic values when public control of technology becomes routine. As with all earlier democratic movements, democracy engenders democracy: technical publics, like every earlier disempowered group, can learn from the exercise of power how to understand their interests and constrain public institutions to serve them. This requires adapting the technological environment itself to the requirements of freedom.

Critical theory of technology thus projects a future in which the politics of technology is recognized as a normal aspect of public life. The means the public can employ to express its will are already foreshadowed in many current practices such as citizen juries, technical controversies, protests, boycotts and legal challenges, hacking and other creative appropriations of technologies, and of course such familiar methods as elections and government regulation.

In such a technical democracy, technical work would take on a different character. Design would be consciously oriented toward politically legitimated human values rather than subject to the whims of profit-making organizations and military bureaucracies. These values would be installed in the technical disciplines themselves, much as the value of healing presides over the medical synthesis of biological knowledge of the human body.

Technological rationality would no longer be defined as purely instrumental but would become conscious of its value-laden character and as such open a space within its compass for moral and political rationality. This would be the recovery of what Max Horkheimer called "objective reason," a reason that combines means and ends, in contrast with the "subjective reason" of modern times that has no intrinsic goals.

#### *Instrumentalization theory*

This perspective on a possible future distinguishes critical theory of technology from much contemporary philosophy and sociology of technology. While many philosophers continue to make grand normative claims based on classic texts such as Heidegger's famous "Question Concerning Technology," sociologists have the opposite vice and can frequently be found stirring the empirical fragments with no overall conception of modernity and its problems. Critical theory of technology has attempted to bridge this gap by integrating insights and methods from both traditions in what I call "instrumentalization theory."

The anti-essentialist assumptions of contemporary empirical technology studies contrast with the abstract essentialism of traditional philosophy of technology. However, technology is obviously distinguishable from other types of objects, and technical action has an undeniable specificity that determines its appropriate range of application. This dilemma is resolved by a socio-historic notion of the essence of technology, enabling the researcher to do empirical work in the light of larger normative issues and vice versa. The instrumentalization theory accordingly distinguishes the cognitive and imaginative conditions of technical activity, on one side, and the social mediations that intervene in the design of devices and systems, on the other.

Every concrete technical achievement presupposes the ability to perceive the world in terms of functions and affordances. That perception constitutes what I refer to as a "primary instrumentalization." Objects of technical activity are defined and isolated from their natural context through the primary instrumentalization which decontextualizes them and reduces them to their usable aspects. We describe this as the faculty of "cleverness," which humans share with a few other animal species. When a child piles boxes on top of each other to create a tower, she is already learning to engage with the world technically, isolating the boxes from their normal place for a usage which ignores their many aspects for a single one, their capacity to stack. This relation to reality, which Heidegger called "readiness-to-hand," is a generic feature of human being, corporeally present in the opposable thumb.

Objects introduced into technical networks are more or less transformed. They generally bear the mark of the primary instrumentalization to which they have been submitted. It is this which constitutes the intrinsic limit of the technical as a form of thought and action. Hence we reject the idea that there are appropriate techniques for everything, from forming friendships to enjoying Thanksgiving dinner. Clearly, the decontextualizations and reductions characteristic of the primary instrumentalization have at most a subordinate place in the background of close human relations and festive occasions.

Technical objects can only achieve realization in a device or system by taking on more and more social determinants at each stage in the production process, from the working up of raw materials to the final output of finished products. The technically underdetermined aspects of the objects are decided along the way so as to adapt them to a given social world. This process of social determination is called the "secondary instrumentalization."

The social appears in the technical domain in two principal forms I call "systematizations" and "mediations." Systematizations are the causal interconnections between the various parts of a device and between the device and its technical, human and natural environments. Since there is no unique causal logic determining the optimum functioning and relationships of technologies, empirical study finds society even in this apparently pure technical aspect. Mediations operate at the level of meaning and govern aspects of technologies that fall under ethical and aesthetic criteria. These aspects are not limited to prohibitions and external appearances but penetrate to the technical heart of the object.

Automobiles exemplify both aspects; they are designed systematically to work with specific types of roads and fuels, and stylistically to appeal to various aesthetic tastes, these latter influencing in turn technical features such as dimensions and engine position. The interaction of these two dimensions is an iterative process in which the meaning technologies take on in the lifeworld feeds back into their design from one stage in their development to the next.

The primary instrumentalization has been studied primarily by philosophers in the existentialist tradition. Their reflections on what Peter-Paul Verbeek has called the "transcendental" preconditions of technology form the basis of a critique of modernity. This excessively negative approach overlooks the way in which the secondary instrumentalization adapts and complements the initial decontextualization and reduction to which objects are submitted as they enter the technical field. The secondary instrumentalization is studied by social scientists and historians, who focus precisely on what philosophers overlook: the concrete social forces and meanings at work in the design process. But, without a theory of the intrinsic structure of the technical, they lack a normative perspective on the consequences and limits of technology. Critical theory of technology attempts to combine insights from both sides of this deadlocked argument.
