---
images: []
order: 103
title: Code and Bias
---

Each type of technology is characterized by a particular configuration of primary and secondary instrumentalizations. These configurations often prevail for a very long time. I call social principles that are successfully and durably inscribed in technological designs "technical codes." This terminology does not suggest, as might Marcuse's notion of "technological rationality," that reason in itself is the object of critique. Technical codes operate at several levels of generality. The most general codes lay down such principles as the secular tendency to deskill labor through technical advance. Specific codes determine the meaning of particular devices.

In every case, a technical code describes the congruence of a social demand and a technical specification. A process of translation links the two in the course of the evolution of technical objects. To continue with the automotive example, a demand for greater attention to safety is translated into seatbelts and airbags; operationally speaking, this is what safety *means*. Thus technology and values are not alien realms, as are facts to values in the treatises of philosophers. Rather, they communicate constantly through the realization of values in design and the impact of design on values. This fluidity of the technical, highlighted in Bruno Latour's concept of delegation, explains why the vaunted trade-off of efficiency and ideology, dear to conservative economists, is largely mythical.

The two instrumentalizations characterize technical production in all societies but are only clearly distinguishable in modern times. This has led to the illusion that they are entirely separate entities enjoying external relations. In fact the distinction is primarily analytic even today, although large organizations often separate certain primarily social functions, such as packaging, from engineering operations. The existence of technical disciplines appears to confirm the common-sense notion that technology and society are separate entities, but these disciplines are actually full of traces of social choices

that have been crystallized in standards and materials imposed originally by social actors in the past. A technological unconscious masks this history.

Nevertheless, radical versions of constructivism are wrong to insist that there is literally no distinction between the social and the technical. If that were true, technical disciplines would not exist, and the makers and users of products would not have to communicate through translations. It would be more accurate to say that modern technology is a particular expression of the social in artifacts and systems, functionalized by rigorous decontextualization, reduction and systematization. Ordinary social belief and behavior is quite different, mixing the technical and non-technical promiscuously. Meanings guide improvisational action in everyday life, forming patterns that intersect with difficulty with engineered products, as Lucy Suchman argues persuasively.

Technical codes are always biased to some extent by the values imposed by the dominant actors. The critical theory of technology aims to uncover these biases. Technical bias is, however, difficult to identify since the unjust social consequences of technical decisions appear to be mere side-effects of "progress." Critical theory of technology rejects the alternative – technical rationality or social bias – and argues that the latter shows up in the former through the social content of technical choices.

This point turns out to be central to the ability of technology studies to contribute to public debate over technical issues. The focus on technology makes it possible to contest the hegemony of neo-liberal economics in the public sphere. The notion that political and property rights create a neutral system in which everyone can pursue their private conception of the good is difficult to criticize effectively. To show that such a system is inherently biased requires an unfamiliar type of argument that has been most often deployed by technology critics. Examples of such arguments are Marcuse's notion that the neutrality of technology places it in the service of the dominant powers, and Albert Borgmann's critique of the mutual implication of liberalism and the "device paradigm" in a bias toward private consumption as a way of life. Critical theory of technology generalizes such arguments through a distinction between "substantive" and "formal" bias.

The usual common-sense notion of bias attributes unjust discrimination to prejudice and emotion. This "substantive bias" is based on factually questionable beliefs which have no place in the technological realm. The intrusion of prejudice and emotion where cool rationality ought to prevail leads to avoidable inefficiencies and breakdowns. But, even where bias in this ordinary sense is avoided, efficient operations are often unfair. Thus critical theory of technology introduces the concept of "formal bias" to understand how a rationally coherent and well-designed and -operated technical device or system can nevertheless discriminate in a given social context. This concept of formal bias parallels notions such as institutional racism and serves much the same purpose, namely to enable a critique of rationalized activities that appear fair when abstracted from their context but have unjust consequences in that context. Identifying and changing formally biased technical codes is essential to democratic advance in modern societies.
