---
images: []
order: 107
title: EVAN SELINGER
---

Cyborg discourse is inter-disciplinary. As the opening to *The Cyborg Handbook* quite appropriately notes:

Cyborgology has become a central concept for academics, not only people in science and technology studies, but also political theorists, military historians, literary critics, human factors engineers, computer scientists, medical sociologists, psychologists, and cultural observers of all types.

To this list we can add literature and film; in these contexts cyborg imagery cuts across "high" and "low" cultural presentations.

Many of the current discussions touch upon themes that can be traced back to ideas that were germinating over half a century ago. In particular, conversations attributable to Norbert Wiener, Manfred Clynes and Nathan Kline feature prominently. During the 1940s and 1950s, Wiener founded the discipline of *cybernetics* – a term which can be traced back to the Greek *kybernetes* (Κυβερνητης ´ ), which means steersman. The central cybernetic theme is that human, animal and machine behavior can be explained by the *same principles* of communication, control, learning and feedback. As Peter Galison notes, Wiener's Second World War work on the AA Predictor – an airplane designed according to cybernetic principles that was supposed to anticipate an enemy pilot's movement in order to shoot him down – proved decisive for Wiener's attempt to create a "new symbol for man" that would replace the outdated mechanical figures made by eighteenth-century clockmakers, and the revered icon of nineteenthcentury engineers, the steam engine. In the 1960s, Clynes and Kline used the term "cyborg" to discuss the possibility of astronauts enduring long periods of space travel. In light of the special physical conditions that would prevail, they considered what kind of enhanced human–machine hybrid would be appropriate for the task.

Contemporary cyborg discussions tend to be polarized between advocates and critics. In order to be effective, both positions have had to take into account – even if only implicitly – Donna Haraway's pioneering work that began in *Socialist Review* with "Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the 1980s." Although situated as an ironic political intervention that had significant implications for feminism and military history, Haraway makes three startling observations about

"transgressed boundaries" and "potent fusions" that theorists of all stripes are still reckoning with. First, the boundary between humanity and animality has been "breached." Countless examples from evolutionary biology and its related fields reveal that creative, intelligent, tool-using and social behaviors that were once thought to be found only in human practices can be found through the animal kingdom. Second, the boundary between humans and machines has become "leaky." Countless examples ranging from the use of prosthetics to advances in artificial intelligence and artificial life attest that it is becoming increasingly difficult to demarcate human possibilities, desires and identities from technological dependencies and machine-generated outputs. Third, the boundary between the physical and the non-physical has been rendered "imprecise." Many of the very images of traditional divinity, such as omnipresence and light, have become apt descriptions of portable and miniaturized microelectronic devices.

On the advocacy side, some scientists and engineers have emerged as spokespeople for a *posthuman* future in which the boundary-transgressions associated with cyborgs become the norm. They insist that, while romantic and nostalgic sentiment might deify our current form of humanity, such a future – one made possible largely by advances in biotechnology and nanotechnology – will free us from the current limitations of embodiment and labor, therein opening up new horizons of scarcely imaginable creativity, collaboration and invigorating challenge. According to Ian Pearson, futurologist at British Telecom, the following scenario is not science fiction but, rather, a plausible historical outcome:

"Homo Cyberneticus" will emerge with a "full duplex link between man and machine." This creature will in turn merge with "Homo Optimus," the genetically engineered "elite race of people who are smart, agile, and disease resistant." Together they will form "Homo Hybridus," which will have no trouble displacing "Homo Ludditus."

For many advocates, the displacement of "Homo Ludditus" should be viewed as a positive evolutionary moment – a cause for celebration in which disgust, not longing, is the appropriate sentiment to have when considering previous incarnations of humanity.

Within the diverse constituency of advocates, the philosopher Andy Clark has emerged as a rather unique voice. His *Natural Born Cyborgs* is a "naturalist" account of humans as "cognitive opportunists" whose "cognitive fossil trail" demonstrates that they deserve to be understood as cyborgs precisely because their special neural plasticity has, at least since the invention of writing, allowed them to facilitate exploitative "symbiotic mergers" that traverse organic and non-organic domains and allow agency to be distributed amongst a "shifting coalition of tools." From this perspective, most concerns about a posthuman future are misguided. Whereas the typical worries center on upcoming technologically induced threats to a stable human identity, it is more scientific, Clark contends, to recognize that a proper understanding of our evolutionary past demonstrates that such a conception of identity was the result of misguided theorizing. Thus Clark insists that, in order to bring about the best of all possible futures, it is incumbent upon people in the present to understand better what it means to be human so that a future can be created that best capitalizes upon the drive of "human nature" to "annex, exploit, and incorporate nonbiological stuff deep into our mental profiles."

#### evan selinger

On the critical side, theorists such as Francis Fukuyama, Leon Kass and Bill McKibben have featured prominently. One of McKibben's most interesting arguments against a posthuman future stems from his sense of how human identity and self-understanding relate to certain forms of embodied action. In contrast to the intellectualist tradition of associating the acquisition of self-understanding with conversation and textual engagement, McKibben notes that basic bodily practices, such as Albert Borgmann's paradigm case of running as a "focal practice," provide unique experiential windows into our finitude. For example, running: (1) can bring about a state of utter presence; (2) can induce a *Gestalt* switch by magnifying the felt qualities of experience; (3) can bring one towards a "core" that psychological defenses typically protect us from; (4) can create a sense of meaning that is inseparable from context; (5) can facilitate a sense of personal meaning that may not be accessible from a third-person perspective; (6) can facilitate united forms of communal participation in which shared embodied experience does not compromise the individual's singularity; (7) can create a link with evolutionary past and cross-cultural present; and (8) can create a sense of meaning that is irreducible to mere sensory experience. While some of these features may remain in a posthuman future, McKibben contends that it is hard to envision others as persisting. After all, much of the meaning involved from practices such as running stem from the notion of "authentic choice" – from the fact that an individual freely designated a particular practice to have personal significance and to be worthy of committed effort, when others could have been selected just as easily. The prospect of designer babies and the use of pharmacology for the purpose of performance "enhancement," however, is said to pose a serious challenge to this sense of authentic engagement. Similarly, the communal connections that practices like running can engender are also said to be threatened. Posthuman runners would lose the primal bond with past generations of human runners. They would also lose that connection with all the present and future beings who, for moral or financial reasons, did not "upgrade" themselves accordingly.
