---
images: []
order: 110
title: EVAN SELINGER
---

According to Sherry Turkle, "In the culture of simulation the notion of authenticity is for us what sex was to the Victorians – 'threat and obsession, taboo and fascination'." This observation invites an explanation that can clarify why such strong and mixed sentiments concerning simulation abound.

To the delight of some and the chagrin of others, many of the current debates about simulation can be traced back to Jean Baudrillard's *œuvre*. According to Baudrillard, the history of imaging contains four distinct interpretations of what "images" are and symbolize. Initially, Baudrillard contends, images were understood as representations. A proper image, therefore, reflected "basic reality." In this context, the simple properties of basic images were said to correspond directly to real phenomena: primitive cave paintings referred to real events, like hunting animals, and religious artifacts reflected the basic reality of God's existence. But, as time progressed, visual culture changed. Baudrillard contends that the *mimetic* sensibility became eclipsed by three transformative stages that culminated in the present, in an age of simulation. Today, images proliferate that do not contain indexical traces of an original referent. Today, ubiquitous images exist that fail to symbolize the melancholic *memento mori*. To clarify these points, the remaining three stages require elaboration.

In the second stage, the image becomes synonymous with the process of concealing and "perverting" a basic reality. Perhaps what Baudrillard has in mind in this context is landscape painting from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. This art form restored a beatific significance to nature, even though that significance had already been lost as a result of the emergence of early industrial culture. While nature had come to be viewed as an instrumental resource to be appropriated for commodity and capital, landscape paintings represented nature in a completely different light. There, nature was portrayed as a divine gift to be cherished for its own intrinsic value. Indeed, during this time period, the institutions of the gallery and the museum were invented as cultural forms. Painterly images of an extinct nature thus became absorbed by the insufficiently critical gaze of middle-class culture.

In the subsequent stage, the image came to be defined as that which masks the "absence" of a basic reality. The context that Baudrillard is referring to is likely the period of mass production in which machines dominate. During this period, essentially indistinguishable copies of a single prototype become prevalent (e.g. mass-produced books,

automobiles, clothes, photographs, etc.). These copies were not counterfeits. Instead, they were viewed as items to be judged as having just as much reality and significance as their guiding model. As a consequence of this shift in sensibility, the concept of the "original" began to lose what Walter Benjamin calls "aura." (Note: Since it is still possible to distinguish between the prototype and its copies during this phase, Baudrillard might have been clearer had he characterized the period as one in which the value of a basic reality is no longer privileged.)

In the fourth and most contemporary stage, Baudrillard insists that the image "bears no relation to any reality whatever: it is its own pure simulacrum." The basic mode of production in this context is not the machine but, rather, information technology. In the present "information age," we are surrounded by simulations that are not designed as copies of original prototypes. Virtual reality, computer models, genetic engineering, status-symbol commodities and media fabrications are paradigm cases of this phenomenon. Since Baudrillard has written extensively on the latter, a few remarks on the topic are in order.

The shift in American opinion about the Vietnam War in the 1960s was largely due to the televised coverage of "real" battlefield and civilian casualties. But recent works such as Baudrillard's provocatively titled *The Gulf War Did Not Take Place* and Paul Virilio's *Strategy of Deception* suggest that a significant shift in visual culture has occurred since then. For example, during the first Gulf War the media presented relentless images of "smart bombs" destroying only deliberately chosen and carefully delimited targets. This, in turn, created misleading impressions about the frequency of indiscriminate bombing and the amount of civilian causalities. A more recent argument, presented by Michael Moore in his Oscar-winning documentary *Bowling for Columbine* is that the media distortion of topics such as urban violence has produced a "culture of fear" in which American citizens routinely become hysterical over sensationalized reporting that masquerades as unbiased presentation.

In addition to media issues, new questions concerning the nature and scope of identity are arising as people continue to explore (and sometimes become psychologically dependent upon) virtual relationships that are cultivated through digital avatars and online personae. These activities are not limited to replacing or enhancing traditional face-to-face encounters. Rather, their very allure lies in their transformative potential: new forms of solitary and inter-subjective experience are arising. For example, the Internet has made it easy to invent alternate life experiences and to explore previously inhibited or underemphasized desires. Indeed, interacting through different and even inconsistent personalities has become so commonplace that it no longer appears conspicuous. The popular Second Life (http://secondlife.com/), an interactive threedimensional virtual world that is built and owned by its residents, exemplifies this point well.

In this context of controversy concerning the quality of simulation-based relationships, worries about the impact of videogames are frequently articulated. In addition to articulating sobering thoughts about obesity, anti-social behavior, depression and de-sensitized judgment, concern has also been expressed over the adverse cognitive and emotional effects that may be arising as a consequence of the military stylizing its recruitment campaigns in a videogame format. As is widely noted, such a distinctive use of visual culture is not innocent.

The appeal to videogames and videogame imagery is being staged during a time in which fighter pilots routinely train with simulators and electronic wargames are "realistically" modeled upon recent combat scenarios. Because skepticism already exists concerning the objectivity of embedded wartime reporting, additional complications can be expected to arise as a result of videogame designers including Associated Press news reports as graphics while urging potential gamers to second-guess whether the US really needed to kill Saddam Hussein's sons. Indeed, collective memory may be weakened as new forms of historical revisionism (and, perhaps, propaganda) threaten to engender dire political consequences.

Moreover, as Catherine Wilson emphasizes, it is important to recognize the fundamental difference that distinguishes videogame violence from cinematic and televised violence. In the latter cases, the audience remains passive. They are merely spectators of violent acts that have been choreographed by others in advance of the viewer witnessing their cinematic and televised unfolding. By contrast, in the case of the former, videogame players assume the role of active agents. The choices they make are responsible for setting causal sequences of violence and predation in motion.

Finally, it should be noted that use of simulation is leading researchers to make innovative and potentially radical proclamations about human behavior. For example, under the auspices of Patrick Grim, the Group for Logic and Formal Semantics has been using game-theoretic models to provide a new understanding of why contact – at least in some instances – can reduce prejudice. Owing to ethical and practical constraints, empirical psychologists cannot conduct the ideal controlled experiment. Such an experiment would require an extreme scenario; "outgroups" would have to be relocated to live with the very "ingroups" who view them prejudicially. The use of simulated agents, however, frees researchers from the limitations that circumscribe how human experimentation should be conducted. While such work may be cutting-edge, it is not unique. Comparable analyses into ethnocentrism, genocide, cultural extinction and other socially relevant topics have also been conducted.
