---
images: []
order: 112
title: Preamble
---

According to Descartes' famous metaphor, the tree of philosophy has three main parts. Metaphysics tends the roots; scientific knowledge of nature ["physics"] constitutes the trunk; and medicine, morals and mechanics form its three main branches. Descartes' interpretations of metaphysics, physics and their requisite epistemology were all contested from the start; but there has always been less criticism of his ultimately practical conclusion, namely that the principal benefit of philosophy comes from gathering the fruit of its three branches (Descartes 1985: 186). Here, Descartes may be seen as giving a full and systematic elaboration of Bacon's slogan, knowledge is power (Schouls 1989: 173); and the obvious moral of this story is that "What is knowledge?" and "What do we use it for?" are the key philosophical questions. *Technology*, on the other hand, is just the totality of means for *applying science* to do/produce whatever we choose.

Of course, many would be uncomfortable actually stating this conclusion in all of the circumstances in which they nevertheless understand it to be true. Who, for example, is eager to characterize prestigious activities like medical care as merely applied science, so that surgery is no different in principle from plumbing? Yet it would be difficult to exaggerate how deeply the technology-as-applied-science model has affected modern Western thought. Even the good life itself tends to be conceived as a kind of technological product, a planned outcome of the right theory. All we need do, it seems, is find the appropriate social scientific, economic, political or even (by analogy, for those still hostile to science) religious knowledge and put it into practice.

In twenty-first-century retrospect, this model of knowledge, practice and their relation no longer seems quite so innocent or commonsensical, and philosophers of technology now object to it in various ways. But why have their objections come so late? Undoubtedly the success of modern science in both acquiring knowledge and altering our circumstances is part of the answer. Yet, even after these successes began to seem a mixed blessing, the very definition of a civilized mentality seemed, above all, a matter of cultivating the scientific tree and harvesting its fruits. The key is to notice that, in this model, technology-as-mere-means typically functions as silent assumption, not as explicit concept. Hence, even after objections to rosy progressivist claims about a scientific culture became plentiful, this assumption could remain unchallenged. To meet the objections, it seemed sufficient to redouble efforts to defend science, analyze

its epistemic structures, and exercise greater care in deciding how to use it. Here lay philosophy's central topics and civilization's greatest hope (Sorell 1991). One sees all of this played out as the main strands of modern thought develop after Descartes (Mitcham 1990).

In the Anglo-American empiricist, French/German Enlightenment, and European positivist traditions, technology typically continues to be conceived in straightforwardly Cartesian fashion. Science tells us what there is; technology simply employs this knowledge in whatever way we decide. "From science comes foresight, from foresight, action," declared the father of positivism (Comte 1988: 38). The primary philosophical issues therefore lie either before or after technology. Before we can receive the benefits, we must have reliable knowledge – hence the need for an epistemology of science. Once we have it, we must decide among the technologically possible goals that science empowers us to achieve – hence the need for an ethics (in the broad sense, including socio-political inquiry). With philosophy focused on how we can know and what we may do, technology falls uninterestingly between them.

In the modern romantic-expressivist and post-Hegelian Continental traditions, technology tends to be just as philosophically uninteresting, but for different reasons. At first glance, this might seem surprising, since these traditions are notoriously less likely to define knowledge on the model of science, or to regard the use of science as mostly a force for good. Suspicious of the reductive scientism and false historical optimism that seem to lurk in Enlightenment philosophy, these traditions tend to think of science as expressive only of our theoretical/cognitive and instrumental interests. To ensure a place for other values associated with other interests (e.g. beauty and artistic creativity, the reflective "understanding" of self and others, socio-political liberation, a spiritual life), they tend to give critically restrictive or even dystopian accounts of both scientific rationality itself and its applications to the natural and social world. Yet, precisely in thus curbing the scope and function of science, romantic and post-Hegelian thinkers implicitly reaffirm the status of technology as philosophically inessential. For if the main task is to avoid overrating science and to defend other, noninstrumental purposes, then technology – albeit reconceived as potentially serving several masters – remains in the position of simply being the means for enacting chosen purposes.

By the 1970s, however, this pinched conception of technology was under attack from several directions (Dusek 2006). One line of criticism accompanied growing dissatisfaction with the dominant positivistic tendency to define science in terms of a narrowly formalist, ahistorical model of theory confirmation. As philosophical models of scientific reasoning became more contextualized and pluralized (Kuhn 1996, Longino 2002) and integrated into a new perspective that tended to view science as a human practice instead of just a kind of reasoning (Fuller 2002, Stengers 2000, Rouse 1996), the old idea of technology as merely making use of science also became untenable. Philosophers began to acknowledge what historians and sociologists of technology had always known, namely that modern science and technology are mutually interdependent (Latour and Woolgar 1986). Even early modern science relied upon the prior existence of technical devices (e.g. telescopes, microscopes, measuring instruments) invented by persons who had no recognizably "scientific" concerns (White 1962). Indeed, technology has always mattered in ways only remotely connected with the urge to obtain

natural knowledge – ways driven directly by a desire for useful tools and efficiently "mechanized" practices, or even by a sheer inventiveness and love of gadgetry (Nye 2006).

Philosophical interest in technology, then, began in opposition to the objectivism of traditional philosophy of science. It was no longer possible to ignore the fact that philosophical, sociological and engineering issues concerning technology and science are all in fact intertwined (Knorr-Cetina 1999, Mitcham 1994). At first, these issues were considered primarily at a global level. Debates over concrete ethical, social and political issues only seemed to perpetuate old, deeply held but now obviously problematic general assumptions about science, its appropriations, and the proper role of science and technology in human affairs.

Most famously, Heidegger (1993) suggested that the instrumental definition of modern technology as applied science is "correct," but if we ask what makes it correct we find it is really premodern technology, not modern science, that we must ultimately reconsider. For 2000 years, Western humanity has been elaborating the ancient Greek notion of *techne* as a kind of making that is akin to the productiveness disclosed to us by the cosmos. As a result, we have now come to fashion a world in which, for the most part, our activities, the things we deal with, and even we ourselves all seem to happen together in a world where everything is "enframed" – that is, disclosed and understood as part of a "stockpile" of materials and personnel available for technological purposes. The implication of this argument for our idea of technology is not hard to see. When modern philosophy privileges science and ethics, and largely ignores technology, it gets things backwards. For it is in the "techniques" of both premodern and modern activities that our basic understanding of what there is and what to do with it already resides. If we now find this sense of things constricting or even dangerous, the solution can only be, in Heidegger's phrase, to work out a "free relation" with today's technology.

Heidegger's work is certainly not the only source for these themes, but much recent thinking about technology can be seen as reacting to the general outlook expressed there. One strain explores, more or less specifically in light of Heidegger's own position, what "being freely with" technology might mean (Spinosa et al. 1999, Borgmann 1985). Other strains begin by objecting to views like Heidegger's for their pessimism and for exaggerating negative experiences with technology, and then move on to offer either more phenomenological accounts of contemporary technoscientific life (Ihde 1990) or political and social programs that promise to overcome the restrictive and dehumanizing aspects of today's technoscientific practices (Feenberg 2005a, 2005b; Llewelyn 2004, Haraway 1997).

Some applaud these critical reactions toward Heidegger and others of his generation (e.g. Mumford, Ellul, Ortega y Gasset) as marking an "empirical turn" in recent philosophy of technology (Verbeek 2005, Achterhuis 2001). Some suggest it also signals a welcome revival of elements of the pragmatist tradition (Hickman 2001). Still others praise the long-overdue recognition of the "materiality" of (as opposed to the thinking in) technoscientific practices (Ihde and Selinger 2003). What is noticeable in all the recent trends, however, is their steady enrichment of topics assumed to be included in any philosophically adequate inquiry into today's "technoscientific" life (Ihde 2004). The provocative implication, of course, is that the analysis and critique of technoscientific practice might provide a better entrée to all the major philosophical issues in contemporary human affairs than ethics or the epistemology of science.

### References and Further Reading

- Achterhuis, H. (2001). *American Philosophy of Technology: The Empirical Turn*, trans. Robert P. Crease (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press).
- Borgmann, A. (1985). *Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).
- Comte, A. (1988). *Introduction to Positive Philosophy*, trans. Frederick Ferré (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett).
- Descartes, R. (1985). *Philosophical Works*, Vol. 2, trans. John Cottingham et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
- Dusek, V. (2006). *Philosophy of Technology: An Introduction* (Malden, Mass.: Blackwell).
- Feenberg, A. (2005a). *Heidegger and Marcuse: The Catastrophe and Redemption of History* (New York: Routledge).
- Feenberg, A. (2005b). *Transforming Technology: A Critical Theory Revisited*, 2nd edn (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
- Fuller, S. (2002). *Social Epistemology*, 2nd edn (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press).
- Haraway, D. J. (1997). *Modest\_Witness@Second\_Millennium.FemaleMan©\_Meets\_OncoMouse* (New York: Routledge).
- Heidegger, M. (1993). "The Question Concerning Technology," in D. F. Krell (ed.), *Martin Heidegger: Basic Writings* (New York: HarperCollins), pp. 301–41.
- Hickman, L. (2001). *Philosophical Tools for Technological Culture: Putting Pragmatism to Work* (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press).
- Ihde, D. (1990). *Technology and the Life World: From Garden to Earth* (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press).
- Ihde, D. (2004). "Has the Philosophy of Technology Arrived? A State-of-the-Art Review," *Philosophy of Science*, 71: 117–31.
- Ihde, D. and Selinger, E. (eds) (2003). *Chasing Technoscience: Matrix for Materiality* (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press).
- Knorr-Cetina, K. D. (1999). *Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).
- Kuhn, T. S. (1996). *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions*, 3rd edn (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).
- Latour, B. and Woolgar, S. (1986). *Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts*, 2nd edn (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
- Llewelyn, J. (2004). *Seeing through God: A Geophenomenology* (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press).
- Longino, H. E. (2002). *The Fate of Knowledge* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
- Mitcham, C. (1990). "Three Ways of Being-With Technology," in Gayle L. Ormiston (ed.), *From Artifact to Habitat: Studies in the Critical Engagement with Technology* (Bethlehem, Pa.: Lehigh University Press), pp. 31–59 (reprinted in Mitcham 1994).
- Mitcham, C. (1994). *Thinking through Technology: The Path between Engineering and Philosophy* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).
- Nye, D. (2006). *Technology Matters: Questions to Live With* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Rouse, J. (1996). *Engaging Science: How to Understand Its Practices Philosophically* (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press).

#### robert c. scharff

- Schouls, P. A. (1989). *Descartes and the Enlightenment* (Kingston, Ont.: McGill-Queen's University Press).
- Sorell, T. (1991). *Scientism: Philosophy and the Infatuation with Science* (London: Routledge).
- Spinosa, C., Flores, F. and Dreyfus, H. L. (1999). *Disclosing New Worlds: Entrepreneurship, Democratic Action, and the Cultivation of Solidarity* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Stengers, I. (2000). *The Invention of Modern Science*, trans. D. W. Smith (Minneapolis, Minn.: University of Minnesota Press).
- Verbeek, P. (2005). *What Things Do: Philosophical Reflections on Technology, Agency, and Design* (University Park, Pa.: Penn State University Press).
- White, L. T. (1962). *Medieval Technology and Social Change* (London: Oxford University Press).
