---
images: []
order: 115
title: 2. Definitions of Technological Artifacts
---

Technological artifacts are in general characterized narrowly as material objects made by (human) agents as means to achieve practical ends. Moreover, following Aristotle, technological artifacts are as kinds not seen as natural objects: artifacts do not exist by nature but are the products of art. This general characterization is incorporated in Risto Hilpinen's acceptance condition: "[a]n object is an artifact made by an author only if the author accepts it as satisfying some sortal description included in his productive intention" (2004: sect. 3). This condition applies also to events and works of art; it can be restricted to technological artifacts by limiting the sortal descriptions to technological ones such as "material means to achieve practical end *x*."

Unintended by-products of making (e.g. sawdust) or of experiments (e.g. false positives in medical diagnostic tests) are not artifacts for Hilpinen. Objects that result

from actions of collectives of agents but do not satisfy sortal descriptions in one of the agent's productive intentions (e.g. some paths and villages) are merely artifices. Objects made by agents but not accepted to satisfy the intended sortal descriptions are "scrap."

Hilpinen specifies making as a physical modification of an existing object or as the assembling of existing/modified objects, such that "[t]he existence and some of the properties of an artifact depend [counterfactually] on an author's intention to make an object of certain kind" (2004: sect. 1). Technological artifacts as made objects are different from natural objects in two ways: they can have physical properties that natural objects do not, and they are considered as means to ends. Hilpinen considers the borderline case in which making becomes only selecting (for including "found art" [1993: sect. VI]). If this case holds for technology, a technological artifact becomes more widely a material object accepted by its author as satisfying some technological sortal description. The difference from natural objects is then only that technological artifacts are objects considered by agents to be *usable* as means to practical ends.

Randall Dipert (1993: ch. 2) characterizes technological artifacts also primarily as objects made by agents but broadens his analysis to usable objects by taking artifacts as special cases of tools, which in turn are special cases of instruments. An *instrument* is "an object one of whose properties has been thought by someone to be a means to an end and that has been intentionally employed in this capacity." A *tool* is an object that "has been physically modified, intentionally, to serve as a more effective means to an end" (tools are roughly Hilpinen's artifacts). An artifact is, for Dipert, "an intentionally modified tool whose properties were intended by the agent to be recognized by an agent at a later time as having been intentionally altered for that, or some other, use." This definition also applies to events and art; technological artifacts are artifacts that serve practical purposes (1993: 17).

The characterization as usable objects is more explicit in the "Dual [structuralintentional] Nature" analysis by which technological artifacts are "(i) designed physical structures, which realize (ii) functions, which refer to human intentionality" (Kroes and Meijers 2006). Designing is analyzed as the development of use plans for objects – series of actions that include manipulations of objects – by which agents can achieve ends, and as the description of the physical structure of those objects (Vermaas and Houkes 2006). Designing, in this broad sense, turns the described objects into means (Dipert's instruments) but does not require that the objects be modified: if existing objects – technological artifacts or natural objects – meet these descriptions, modification is unnecessary.

These three analyses relate technological artifacts to intentions of individual authors, selecting agents, or designers. A fourth approach takes distance from single agents and describes technological artifacts by societal mechanisms. Basalla (1988), for instance, has given an evolutionary account of technological artifacts in which their creation and use are determined primarily by (longer-term) cultural reproduction and selection. Artifacts are still typically made, but the ends for which they are made are related to (successful) uses over time, and typically not by the intentions of individual (creating) agents.

Characterizing technological artifacts as made objects agrees with the Aristotelian contrast between technological artifacts and natural objects but may be too strict: pieces of flint that were selected by our predecessors seem equally technological artifacts as the ones that were carefully cut. Yet characterizing technological artifacts as usable objects may be too permissive and lead to including natural objects: the sun is often used for orientation, but it seems odd to take it as a technological artifact.
