---
images: []
order: 116
title: 3. Technological Artifacts in Philosophy
---

### *3.1 Technological artifacts and categorization: function theories*

Technological artifacts are often taken as objects with functions, as (made) means to ends (this approach has been criticized, as we discuss below). The philosophical tradition of function theory analyzes this concept of function, in part to distinguish types of technological artifacts. Functions are not the only features by which technological artifacts are categorized (see Mitcham 1994: ch. 7) but they are of particular interest because of the relation they establish between technological artifacts and human intentionality, and as part of an ongoing discussion in metaphysics about taking functions as nominal or real essences of technological artifacts (e.g. Baker 2004, Elder 2004, Thomasson 2003, Wiggins 2001: ch. 3). The analysis of functions originated to a large extent in philosophy of biology, in which analyses of biological functions were generalized to include also artifact functions. One can distinguish three approaches. In the first, fitting analyses of technological artifacts in terms of intentions of individual agents, functions are the capacities or purposes for which agents make or select artifacts (e.g. Neander 1991). In the second approach, fitting the evolutionary account of technological artifacts, functions are those capacities for which artifacts are reproduced over time (e.g. Millikan 1984, 1993). And finally Robert Cummins's (1975) approach, compatible with both the intentional and the evolutionary accounts, in which functions are causal roles of technological artifacts that contribute to their (successful) uses. In recent analyses of functions in technology these three approaches are criticized and combined to theories that take more notice of the particulars of technological functional descriptions. Beth Preston (1998) has argued for a pluralist theory in which functions of technological artifacts are described as reproduced capacities and/or as causal roles. Vermaas and Houkes (2006) have argued for a (monist) function theory that integrates elements of the three approaches.

#### *3.2 Technological artifacts and society: Science and Technology Studies*

In Science and Technology Studies, two distinct types of analysis of technological artifacts have developed. The "social construction of technology" (SCOT) approach analyzes technological artifacts as the outcomes of processes of social interaction between designers and relevant social groups (Bijker 1995). Actor-network theory (ANT), however, proposes a symmetrical approach, in which both humans and artifacts play constructing roles (Latour 1993), and in which technological artifacts are *constructed* and *constructing* at the same time. Understanding artifacts as constructions, rather than as *social* constructions, requires taking into account the constructing role of both humans and a variety of "non-humans," like the material environment in which the

artifact will function and the characteristics of the materials out of which it is made. The constructing role of technological artifacts in society is often indicated with the concept of "script" (Akrich 1992), making visible that technological artifacts, similar to the script of a theater play or a movie, can prescribe specific actions to their users, like speed bumps that help to determine human driving behavior. Latour has even analyzed such forms of agency of technological artifacts in terms of morality (Latour 1992, 2002). On a more political level, Langdon Winner has analyzed the social role of technological artifacts in terms of "politics," with the help of his well-known example of the bridges on Long Island in New York over the road to Jones Beach, deliberately built very low by architect Robert Moses to prevent buses passing through, thus blocking access for poor and black people who normally use public transit (Winner 1986).

#### *3.3 Human–artifacts relations: philosophical anthropology*

In philosophical anthropology, several approaches to technological artifacts have been developed, with different analyses of the nature of the relations between humans and artifacts. The first approaches were mainly *instrumentalist*. Ernst Kapp (1877) approached technological artifacts as projections of human bodily organs. Related to this, Arnold Gehlen (1988) argued that human beings should be seen as "*Mangelwesen*," deficient beings needing technological artifacts to compensate for their poor abilities to survive in an environment to which they are not equipped by nature. Both approaches give technological artifacts the instrumental role of replacing specific human possibilities, enhancing human capacities, or relieving humans from burdensome tasks.

A second approach focuses on the *alienation* supposedly brought about by technological artifacts. Existential philosophers like Karl Jaspers (1951) held that society has become an apparatus of machines, bureaucracy and laborers, creating mass rule rather than authentic existence. Operating machines in a factory reduces human beings to mere appendices of the machinery, producing mass products which do not allow attachment to or engagement with them. Rather than being merely functional extensions of the human, technological artifacts are seen here as a threat to it. Their perfection could even lead to a sense of humbleness, indicated by Günther Anders (1987) as "Promethean shame" – as opposed to Prometheus' pride at having stolen fire from the Gods.

A third approach to the relations between humans and technological artifacts focuses on their interwoven character. Don Ihde (1990) developed an analysis of human– technology relations, arguing that technological artifacts do not alienate us from the lifeworld but, rather, mediate our relations to it and help to shape a technological culture. Donna Haraway (1991) and Bruno Latour (1993) even go one step further by arguing that it becomes ever more difficult actually to make a distinction between human beings and technological artifacts. With their notions of "cyborgs" (Haraway) and "hybrids" (Latour), they aim to make visible that both are interwoven to such an extent that one cannot exist without the other, since the "human" and the "technological" help to shape each other. A biological, and radical, variant of this position is transhumanism, which is defended by authors like Hans Moravec (1988) and Nick Bostrom (2005a, 2005b), who announce the end of *Homo sapiens* and the advent of a transhuman life form which will be a blend of organic and technological elements.

### *3.4 Technological artifacts and the lifeworld: phenomenology*

In close connection to anthropological approaches, phenomenological approaches to technological artifacts were developed, initially by Martin Heidegger, and later by Don Ihde and Albert Borgmann (cf. Verbeek 2005). In his early work *Sein und Zeit*, Heidegger analyzed the role of "tools" or "equipment" (*Zeug*) in the relations between human beings and their world (Heidegger 1966). In order to understand equipment, Heidegger stated, one should try to describe not its properties but how it is present to human beings when they use it. Artifacts in use typically withdraw from human attention; they submerge in human involvements with reality, which take place "through" the tool. Tools in use are "ready to hand"; they remain unnoticed, as centers of a complex structure of references and relations. Only from a distanced and observing standpoint – for instance when they break down – tools are "present at hand" objects.

In his later work, Heidegger developed a radically different approach (1977), stating that technology should not be understood in terms of artifacts, but as a way of "revealing reality" – a fundamental understanding of reality which lets us interpret it in terms of raw material, available for human manipulation. Technological artifacts do not help to shape human relations with the world any more now, but function as expressions of a specific way of taking up with reality (for an analysis of the development of Heidegger's thinking about technological artifacts, see Verbeek 2005). Albert Borgmann (1984) has brought this analysis in closer relation to actual technological artifacts. He makes a distinction between "things" that require engaged interaction with themselves in order to be used and "devices" that impede engagement because they typically make commodities available which can be consumed without engagement with the machinery producing them. The boiler, thermostat, pipes and radiators of a central heating system deliver "warmth" as a commodity that can be consumed without active engagement, whereas a fireplace requires engaging practices like gathering wood, chopping it, and filling, poking and cleaning the hearth.

Don Ihde (1979, 1983, 1990) uses Heidegger's tool-analysis as a starting-point for analyzing what he calls "human–technology relations." Ihde distinguishes four such relations between human beings and technological artifacts: the *embodiment* relation, which resembles Heidegger's "readiness-to-hand," and in which humans perceive the world through the artifact, as when looking through a microscope; the *hermeneutic*  relation, in which the artifact gives a representation of the world which requires interpretation, like reading off a thermometer; the *alterity* relation, in which humans experience the artifact itself, much like Heidegger's "presence-at-hand"; and the *background* relation, in which technological artifacts shape a background for our experiences, like the switching on and off of the fridge. Ihde elaborated how technological artifacts, from all these human–technology relations, mediate how human beings experience and interpret the world. These mediations are not essential properties of technological artifacts, though, as Ihde indicates with the concept of multistability; human beings can appropriate them in different frameworks of interpretation and use practices, which can result in various mediating roles.

### References and Further Reading

- Akrich, M. (1992). "The De-scription of Technical Objects," in W. E. Bijker and J. Law (eds), *Shaping Technology/Building Society* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), pp. 205 –24.
- Anders, G. (1987). *Die Antiquiertheit des Menschen* (Munich: Beck).
- Baker, L. R. (2004). "The Ontology of Artifacts," *Philosophical Explorations*, 7: 99–111.
- Basalla, G. (1988). *The Evolution of Technology* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
- Bijker, W. E. (1995). *Of Bicycles, Bakelites and Bulbs: Toward a Theory of Sociotechnical Change* Cambridge, Mass./London: MIT Press).
- Borgmann, A. (1984). *Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life: A Philosophical Inquiry* (Chicago, Ill./London: University of Chicago Press).
- Bostrom, N. (2005a). "A History of Transhumanist Thought," *Journal of Evolution and Technology*, 14 (1): 1–25.
- Bostrom, N. (2005b). "In Defence of Posthuman Dignity," *Bioethics*, 19 (3): 202–14.
- Cummins, R. (1975). "Functional Analysis," *Journal of Philosophy*, 72: 741–65.
- Dipert, R. R. (1993). *Artifacts, Art Works, and Agency* (Philadelphia, Pa.: Temple University Press).
- Elder, C. L. (2004). *Real Natures and Familiar Objects* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Gehlen, A. (1988 [1957]). *Man: His Nature and Place in the World* (New York: Columbia University Press).
- Haraway, D. (1991). "A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century," in *Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature* (New York: Routledge), pp. 149–81.
- Heidegger, M. (1966 [1927]). *Being and Time*, trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson (New York: Harper & Row).
- Heidegger, M. (1977 [1949]). "The Question Concerning Technology," in *The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays*, trans. W. Lovitt (New York: Harper & Row).
- Hilpinen, R. (1993). "Authors and Artifacts," *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society*, 93: 155–78.
- Hilpinen, R. (2004). "Artifact," *The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2004 Edition)*, ed. Edward N. Zalta, URL: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2004/entries/artifact
- Ihde, D. (1979). *Technics and Praxis* (Dordrecht: Reidel).
- Ihde, D. (1983). *Existential Technics* (Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press).
- Ihde, D. (1990). *Technology and the Lifeworld* (Bloomington, Ind./Minneapolis, Minn.: Indiana University Press).
- Jaspers, K. (1951 [1931]). *Man in the Modern Age*, trans. E. Paul and C. Paul (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul).
- Kapp, E. (1877). *Grundlinien einer Philosophie der Technik. Zur Entstehungsgeschichte der Kultur aus neuen Gesichtspunkten* (Braunschweig: Verlag George Westermann).
- Kroes, P. and Meijers, A. (2006). "The Dual Nature of Technical Artefacts," *Studies in History and Philosophy of Science*, 37: 1–4. See also http://www.dualnature.tudelft.nl
- Latour, B. (1992). "Where Are the Missing Masses? The Sociology of a Few Mundane Artifacts," in W. E. Bijker and J. Law (eds), *Shaping Technology/Building Society* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Latour, B. (1993). *We Have Never Been Modern*, trans. C. Porter (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).
- Latour, B. (2002). "Morality and Technology: The End of the Means," in *Theory, Culture and Society*, 19 (5–6): 247–60.
- Millikan, R. G. (1984). *Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories: New Foundations for Realism* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

- Millikan, R. G. (1993). *White Queen Psychology and Other Essays for Alice* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Mitcham, C. (1994). *Thinking through Technology: The Path between Engineering and Philosophy* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).
- Moravec, H. (1988). *Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human Intelligence* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).
- Neander, K. (1991). "The Teleological Notion of 'Function'," *Australasian Journal of Philosophy*, 69: 454–68.
- Preston, B. (1998). "Why Is a Wing Like a Spoon? A Pluralist Theory of Function," *Journal of Philosophy*, 95: 215–54.
- Thomasson, A. L. (2003). "Realism and Human Kinds," *Philosophy and Phenomenological Research*, 67: 580–609.
- Verbeek, P. P. (2005). *What Things Do: Philosophical Reflections on Technology, Agency, and Design* (University Park, Pa.: Penn State University Press).
- Vermaas, P. E. and Houkes, W. (2006). "Technical Functions: A Drawbridge between the Intentional and Structural Nature of Technical Artefacts," *Studies in History and Philosophy of Science*, 37: 5–18.
- Wiggins, D. (2001). *Sameness and Substance Renewed* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). Winner, L. (1986). "Do Artifacts Have Politics?," in *The Whale and the Reactor* (Chicago, Ill./London: University of Chicago Press).
