---
images: []
order: 121
title: Preamble
---

From its inception, the philosophical movement now known as classical American pragmatism was strongly committed to the methods of the sciences. Charles S. Peirce (1839–1914) was employed by the US Coast and Geodetic Survey. William James (1842–1910), who was trained as a physician, taught physiology before turning to psychology and philosophy. John Dewey (1859–1952) and his team at the University of Chicago performed experiments related to perception and attention.

The close relationship between pragmatism and experimentalism is evident in Peirce's 1878 maxim: "Consider what effects, which might conceivably have practical bearings, we conceive the object of our conception to have. Then, our conception of these effects is the whole of our conception of the object" (Peirce 1986). William James extended the application of this proposition by asserting that, for the pragmatist, "theories become instruments, not answers to enigmas, in which we can rest" ( James 1975). Dewey pushed it still further by treating logical objects, numbers, hypotheses and other abstract entities as tools that are designed, developed and utilized in much the same ways as material tools, that is, for the sake of achieving some desired end.

Building on his insights into the relations between tool use and inquiry, Dewey had by the 1890s already begun to develop a comprehensive project that would ultimately relate technology to the history of science, education, social and political philosophy, the arts and even religion. His application of philosophical tools to a critique of technological culture thus preceded the efforts of most other twentieth-century philosophers of technology by several decades. Unlike most of his philosophical contemporaries, however, he also thought that an improved understanding of technological culture could effect a reform of the tools and techniques of philosophy. The fact that Dewey's contributions to the philosophy of technology were not generally acknowledged until the 1990s (Hickman 1990) may be due in part to his failure to devote any single work to the subject. His philosophy of technology instead leavens his extensive published work.

In his 1896 "The Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology" (Dewey 1972), published three decades before the publication of Martin Heidegger's *Being and Time*, Dewey distinguished between two modes of experience that Heidegger would later term "readiness-to-hand" and "present-to-hand." He developed this material further in 1916 in *Democracy and Education* (Dewey 1980a) and in 1925 in *Experience and Nature* (Dewey 1981). Given the relative paucity of discussions of educational issues by other philosophers of technology, it is noteworthy that Dewey employed this distinction in the curriculum of his experimental elementary school during the 1890s (Dewey 1979, 1980a).

Like the Heidegger of *Being and Time*, Dewey rejected the ancient Greek view of technology that demeaned the work of the craftsman by subordinating the practical and the productive to the theoretical. Unlike the later (post-Second World War) Heidegger, however, who some critics view as having turned to a nostalgic and romanticized view of technology that tended to overshadow or even negate his earlier phenomenological commitments, Dewey consistently linked the accomplishments of the technosciences since the seventeenth century to their ability to treat theoretical and practical activities as equal partners in inquiry, negotiating the business of producing new tools and new outcomes.

Dewey's position stands in stark contrast to that of Jacques Ellul (Ellul 1964), whose work was highly influential during the classic period of the philosophy of technology. For Ellul, technology was essentially an autonomous system that leaves virtually no room for human freedom. For Dewey, however, "technology" does not name a thing, system or force that could be autonomous. It names instead a particular type of human activity that thrives on freedom of thought and prudent innovation. As the *logos* of *techne*, technology is for Dewey inquiry into tools and techniques in the same sense in which biology is inquiry into forms of life.

Technological success or failure is in Dewey's view the responsibility of human actors as they engage social networks as well as networks of non-human objects and events. Although past successes may provide platforms from which future technology can be mounted, there is no general recipe for technological success. Technology requires sensitivity to context. One consequence of this view is that "appropriate" technology does not necessarily require small projects: projects of any size may be appropriate, depending on the types of problems to be solved. It also follows from this view that technology, as inquiry into tools and techniques, cannot be exported. This thesis has important social and political consequences.

Dewey's position also differs sharply from that of "first generation" critical theorists Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno (Horkheimer and Adorno 1987), who linked technology to ideology and alienation. Dewey did not think that there was anything essentially ideological or alienating about technology. He was well aware of the excesses of *laissez-faire* capitalism; he worked throughout his long career to address racial and economic injustice; but he did not think such problems the fault of technology. In 1930, during the Great Depression, for example, Dewey wrote that "'Technology' signifies all the intelligent techniques by which the energies of nature and man are directed and used in satisfaction of human needs; it cannot be limited to a few outer and comparatively mechanical forms. In the face of its possibilities, the traditional conception of experience is obsolete" (Dewey 1984b).

Dewey's response to the "ideology" and "alienation" arguments advanced by firstgeneration critical theorists was to naturalize technology by locating inquiry into tools and techniques within an evolutionary account of human development. It was in this connection that he refused to draw a sharp ontological distinction between tools that are concrete or tangible and those that are abstract or intangible. He regarded both a hammer and the number 2, for example, as tools that have been refined from the raw materials of human experience in order to serve evolving ends. The primary distinction between the two types of tools is functional: "intellectual tools," he wrote, "are indefinitely more flexible in their range of adaptation than other mechanical tools" (Dewey 1980b). Dewey also recognized the ceremonial objects and ideas of art and religions as tools, although he argued that progress in refining the tools of the latter had tended to lag behind other areas of human development.

Dewey's naturalistic thesis has important consequences for environmental philosophy. Rejecting transcendentalist arguments, Dewey's pragmatic technology utilizes one part of nature to transform or reconstruct another part of nature. Some situations call for what is relatively external to the organism to be altered or adapted to the needs of the organism. Other situations require the organism to accommodate itself to what are relatively external conditions. In most cases, however, what is required is what Dewey terms "adjustment" – a judicious balance between adaptation and accommodation. Dewey's pragmatic technology is thus neither essentialist nor reductionist.

The phrase "relatively external to the organism" carries special freight in this connection. Dewey refused to identify the mind with the brain, or even with the brain plus the peripheral nervous system. He instead treated mind as functional, as intentional, and as verbal: mind*ing* involves brain and nervous system as well as tools and other artifacts, both tangible and intangible. In this matter Dewey anticipated Marshall McLuhan's treatment of media as the extensions of human organisms (McLuhan 1962) and, more recently, the dynamic systems theory of W. Teed Rockwell and others (Rockwell 2005).

Early on, Dewey identified his philosophical position as "instrumentalism." This designation has been the source of difficulty among some of Dewey's European readers, who have misunderstood his project as a version of "instrumental rationality," or the view that efficiency of means trumps evaluation of goals or ends. By using the term "instrumentalism," however, Dewey signaled his "praise of tools, instrumentalities, [and] means, putting them on a level equal in value to ends and consequences, since without them the latter are merely accidental, sporadic and unstable" (Dewey 1984a). Dewey thus rejected "instrumental rationality" at the same time that he provided a basis for evaluating tools and techniques, including the cognitive tools utilized by the main strands of Western philosophy. In this latter role, instrumentalism "involves the doctrine that the origin, structure, and purpose of knowing are such as to render nugatory any wholesale inquiries into the nature of Being" (Dewey 1978).

Dewey's critique of technology also differs in important ways from that of "second generation" critical theorist Jürgen Habermas. Dewey would have certainly rejected Habermas's claim that the human sciences proceed in a manner that is totally different from the technosciences because the former are primarily concerned with meaning and value whereas the latter are primarily concerned with data-gathering. His pragmatic technology provides the basis for relating and integrating within a general theory of inquiry the several interests – the empirical sciences, the historical hermeneutical sciences, and the critical sciences – that Habermas tends to maintain as distinct (Habermas 1971).

Since the 1990s some philosophers of technology have begun to reassess the claims of the classical period of their discipline along lines that are quite familiar to Dewey's readers. Rejecting the approach of what he regarded as Heidegger's overly romanticized position, for example, Don Ihde (1991) developed an "instrumental realism" that treated instruments as the interface between the philosophy of science and the philosophy of technology. Andrew Feenberg (1999) distanced himself from his roots in critical theory by moving to replace an essentialist understanding of technology with one that is functional, rejecting the idea of technology as ideology, and recharacterizing technology in ways that involve greater appreciation of social networks. Peter-Paul Verbeek (2005) argued that Heidegger and other classic philosophers of technology had been looking in the wrong direction: instead of attempting to understand the conditions for the possibility of technology, they should have been developing an account of tools and artifacts as they take their place in life's activities. Each of these positions was both anticipated and developed in detail as a part of John Dewey's pragmatic technology.

#### References and Further Reading

- Dewey, J. (1972). "The Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology," in J. A. Boydston (ed.), *The Collected Works of John Dewey: The Early Works, 1887–1898*, Vol. 5 (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press), pp. 96–109.
- Dewey, J. (1978). "Some Implications of Anti-intellectualism," in J. A. Boydston (ed.), *The Collected Works of John Dewey: The Middle Works, 1899–1924*, Vol. 6 (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press), pp. 86–90.
- Dewey, J. (1979). "Schools of Tomorrow: Play," in J. A. Boydston (ed.), *The Collected Works of John Dewey: The Middle Works, 1899–1924*, Vol. 8 (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press), pp. 275–93.
- Dewey, J. (1980a). "The Nature of Method," in J. A. Boydston (ed.), *The Collected Works of John Dewey: The Middle Works, 1899–1924*, Vol. 9 (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press), pp. 171–87.
- Dewey, J. (1980b). "Science in the Course of Study," in J. A. Boydston (ed.), *The Collected Works of John Dewey: The Middle Works, 1899–1924*, Vol. 9 (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press), pp. 227–39.
- Dewey, J. (1981). "Experience and Nature: Nature, Communication and Meaning," in J. A. Boydston (ed.), *The Collected Works of John Dewey: The Later Works, 1925–1953*, Vol. 1 (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press), pp. 132–61.
- Dewey, J. (1984a). "The Copernican Revolution," in J. A. Boydston (ed.), *The Collected Works of John Dewey: The Later Works, 1925–1953*, Vol. 4 (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press), pp. 229–50.
- Dewey, J. (1984b). "What I Believe," in J. A. Boydston (ed.), *The Collected Works of John Dewey: The Later Works, 1925–1953*, Vol. 5 (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press), pp. 267–78.
- Ellul, J. (1964). *The Technological Society* (New York: Vintage Books).
- Feenberg, A. (1999). *Questioning Technology* (New York: Routledge).
- Habermas, J. (1971). *Knowledge and Human Interests* (Boston, Mass.: Beacon Press).
- Heidegger, M. (1962). *Being and Time* (New York: Harper & Row).
- Hickman, L. (1990). *John Dewey's Pragmatic Technology* (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press).
- Horkheimer, M. and Adorno, T. (1987). *Dialectic of Enlightenment* (New York: Continuum).
- Ihde, D. (1991). *Instrumental Realism: The Interface between Philosophy of Science and Philosophy of Technology*. (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press).

James, W. (1975), in F. Burkhardt (ed.), *The Works of William James: Pragmatism* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).

McLuhan, M. (1962). *The Gutenberg Galaxy* (Toronto: University of Toronto Press).

Peirce, C. S. (1986). "How to Make Our Ideas Clear," in C. J. Kloesel et al. (eds), *Writings of Charles S. Peirce*, Vol. 3 (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press), pp. 257–76.

Rockwell, W. T. (2005). *Neither Brain Nor Ghost* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

Verbeek, P. (2005). *What Things Do: Philosophical Reflections on Technology, Agency, and Design* (University Park, Pa.: Penn State University Press).
