---
images: []
order: 124
title: DON IHDE
---

At first glance, it might appear that hermeneutics as a theory of interpretation, and technologies as the array of artifacts used by humans, might not be easily related. However, in so far as all technologies as used by humans are ascribed with ranges of often complex meanings, so also are texts, so that at a deeper level hermeneutics and technologies potentially exhibit considerable interrelations a few of which will be explored here.

Hermeneutics is also usually thought of as pertaining to linguistic phenomena, and most primarily to written or *textual* interpretation. Clearly, in the pre-modern European traditions, hermeneutics was most focally practiced with respect to sacred texts, particularly biblical ones. However, with the spread of modernist thought and with beginnings largely in the eighteenth century and the subsequent rise of "biblical criticism," or the question of interpretation which questioned the historical origins and formations of biblical texts, the notions of a *critical intepretation* began to expand into a broader critical theory. By the nineteenth century the main currents of scholarly thinking began to differentiate disciplines into more distinct practices with the methods and aims of the natural sciences – previously "natural philosophy" – and the human sciences into two distinguishable styles of thinking. The most famous and longest-lasting set of distinctions remains associated with Wilhelm Dilthey and his *Naturwissenschaften*  interpreted by an "explanation theory," in contrast to the *Geisteswissenschaften* interpreted by a "theory of understanding." In the Diltheyan context, it would be clear that hermeneutics would be one form of understanding or *Verstehen* and be associated with the humanities*.* But Dilthey was not alone with this yet more widely expanded notion of hermeneutics since the theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher also quite explicitly elevated hermeneutics as effectively *the* method of the humanities and of a universal interpretation of humanity.1 Capping off this expansion of hermeneutics as an ever expanding theory of interpretation, in the twentieth century Martin Heidegger explicitly called for ontology itself to be *hermeneutic* in his landmark publication *Being and Time* (1927). As such, hermeneutics becomes an even broader theory of interpretation, encompassing being-in-the-world.

Where, then, in this expansion of a hermeneutic theory of meaning, from sacred texts to ontology, do technologies fit? In this context within the philosophy of technology, two interesting suggestions will be posed: First, beginning quite specifically with the older and narrower sense of hermeneutics as focusing upon *texts*, while it should be immediately apparent that any theory of meaning or significance relating to texts must recognize that *texts are technologically produced*! Written language – resulting in texts – is a process of some kind of writing production entailing artifacts. In the still widely accepted master narrative concerning written language, it is usually held that cuneiform was probably the earliest datable form of writing, going back to 6000 bp. However, tortoise-shell writing from China also seems to date back to 6000 bp, suggesting multiple origins for this process.2 Here the technological system is one which includes a tablet of wet clay, a stylus, probably most commonly a sharpened stick; and engaging a set of skills applied by a human scribe. The scribe *inscribes* a set of marks upon the clay tablet, which after baking or other hardening processes can be be *read* – visually interpreted – by a skilled reader. Antiquity produced a considerable range of such textual-technological processes: cuneiform, as just mentioned, but also papyrus reed "paper" inscribed with a brush plus ink and again entailing a skilled scribe and skilled reader to complete the system; Asian rice paper with brush and ink and a different writing system; and of course the later, major invention of the alphabet in its many variations, first amongst Semitic peoples, then refined by the Greeks. Here, quite literally, *hermeneutics meets technologies* in the invention, history and development of written language. Put more strongly, the technologies of textual production make hermeneutics as a theory of interpretation necessary and possible.

The materially productive connection between the development of text producing technologies of writing has, in postmodernity, been revisited by the variations upon several "linguistic turns" in the humanistic disciplines. First, amongst analytic philosophers, the task became one of language (and logical) analysis, soon followed by a similar but more textually based turn by hermeneutic philosophers.3 But, in both cases, there can be noted very little sensitivity to, or interest in, the technologies which produce such writing or its end product, texts. Only the echo of such a process appears, for example, in Jacques Derrida's notion of *inscription* and the *trace* which he does acknowledge are the marks produced by material using activities. Similarly, Bruno Latour's later claim that all laboratory equipment produces *inscriptions*, or *visible displays,* also echoes, at best, the underlying technologies of production.4

A second perspective upon a technology–hermeneutics relationship emerges by reversing the order which views the materially productive bases of writing technologies to texts, to a view which begins with the array of technologies and the meaningcontexts into which technologies fit. Technological artifacts, although they can be simply any material object including non-designed and non-manufactured ones, typically are artifacts which have been shaped and "designed." Indeed, the dominant common notions of designing and shaping often entail a belief that "designer intent" is or should affect both the meaning and use of the technologies involved. Yet such constraints are at best partial and in terms of actual histories may actually often fall away or take very different trajectories. Edward Tenner catalogues a history of unintended side-effects which accompany many, if not most, technologies.5 An older example, frequently recounted, relates to Alfred Nobel's invention of dynamite, an explosive technology "designed" to make the mining process easier and more effective, which, tragically, also made wartime explosives more effective. Tenner's examples include the notion that electronic communications would produce the "paperless society," but

which today uses more paper than ever before, and the list goes on indefinitely. This, however, can be taken as a *hermeneutic problem.* That is, technologies, precisely because they can be taken and used in a multiplicity of contexts, uses and trajectories, *display a range of indeterminancy of meaning* which is precisely the phenomenon which any hermeneutic theory of meaning must engage.

Here, one can begin by approximating some of the classical textual and literary problems in hermeneutics to analog problems with technologies, and show the beginnings of creative interaction between hermeneutics and technologies. In literary and textual contexts, one question relates to origins, such as the question of "author's intent," but also to the historical-cultural-social context of the origin of the text. The same kind of question with respect to technologies can be raised concerning "designer intent," and the historical-cultural-social context of the origin of the technology. Technologies, like texts, are embedded in social meanings. In their classic examination of the development of the bicycle, in *The Social Construction of Technology,* Trevor Pinch and Wiebe Bijker show how social meanings – not only technical capacities – relate to development. The association of the high wheel Penny Farthing bicycle with bold young masculine males, and the Safety Bicycle (with brakes and accommodation to skirts) with women, clearly played a role in this technical evolution. Technologies are open, they argue, to interpretive flexibility.6 In the history of literary critical hermeneutics, for example, the notion of author's intent as the meaning of a text has become criticized as the "intentional fallacy," since in many cases intent cannot be discovered and in others meanings other than intended often come to dominate. Similarly, in the history of technology, "designer intent" is often radically modified as technologies come into use and/or are modified over time. Historically the prosthetic design intent of both the telephone and the typewriter lost out to other communication and commercial uses and meanings.7

Drawing from the traditions of the interpretation of sacred texts, the role of *commentary traditions* are also of importance. Commentary traditions deflect interpretive trajectories and change their directions by showing new possibilities. Imagine a simple example: the Fall of Adam and Eve in the Garden. The biblical story has three characters – Adam, Eve and the Serpent. Taking of the forbidden fruit of the knowledge of good and evil constitutes the "fall" from innocence. But which character is to be assigned the blame? The text is not transparent, thus commentary, itself situated in some cultural-historicalsocial context, will provide possible perspectives. Adam, if viewed hierarchically and patriarchally, will be most responsible; or Eve, if viewed in the context of some sexually loaded context, or the Serpent, if viewed in a pre-existent flaw of Nature are all possibilities. Similarly, the choice today to replace lightbulbs with incandescent, in a strictly short-term economic context, halogen or fluorescent if in a longer-term, energy-saving context, are choices of which dominates parallel to the commentary example. The hermeneutics–technologies relationship is, at depth, one of texts and technologies both being humanly produced but in ways in which meanings accrue and from which trajectories can be taken. Critical interpretation is called for with both texts and technologies.

There is finally yet another step possible. What could be called a *material hermeneutics* is yet another expansion from pre-modern hermeneutics. Here the focus is upon meanings inherent in, or expressible from, technologies, particularly those which are instrumental in the production of knowledge. Metaphorically this would be a hermeneutics which helps *things* or materiality "speak." Physical anthropology and archeology are two disciplines which entail prior developments of such a material hermeneutics. In both, significant physiological shaping – tooth enamel and shape and size in physical anthropology can help determine function and species – and cultural stylistics – typical style of pottery and other use-objects – can help determine which culture and period is being examined. But, beyond these traditional means, contemporary means which utilize carbon 14 dating, thermo-luminescence, mass spectroscopy, penetrate and yield interpretations which far exceed those of traditional observations. This, too, can be recognized as a hermeneutic, a materially hermeneutic process.

#### Notes

- 1. An extensive history and comparison of hermeneutics may be found in P. Riceour, *The Conflict of Interpretations* (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1974). Also see D. Ihde, *Expanding Hermeneutics: Visualism in Science* (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1998).
- 2. See S. R. Fischer, *A History of Writing* (London: Reaktion Books, 2005).
- 3. R. Rorty (ed.), *The Linguistic Turn: Essays in Philosophical Methodology* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1967). Unnoticed by most analytic philosophers, however, was the similar turn by J. Derrida, *De la Grammatology* (1974), later *Of Grammatology*, trans. G. C. Spivak (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976).
- 4. Derrida's notion of the *trace* and the *inscription* takes shape in *Of Grammatology* and is also similarly noted with respect to laboratory experiments interpreted as *inscriptions* or *visualizations* by B. Latour, *Science in Action* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1987). Also see Don Ihde's use of *hermeneutic relations* in a similar instrumental context in *Technology and the Lifeworld* (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1990).
- 5. E. Tenner, *Why Things Bite Back: Technology and the Revenge of Unintended Consequences* (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1996).
- 6. W. Bijker, *Of Bicycles, Bakelites and Bulbs* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1995).
- 7. F. Kittler, F., *Grammaphone, Film and Typewriter* (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1992).
