---
images: []
order: 128
title: LORENZO C. SIMPSON
---

Technology and technological systems are embedded in a variety of social, political and economic contexts – contexts that ultimately shape the concrete form that material technologies and technological processes will assume.1 Despite such contextual differentials, an underlying rationality can be discerned. This can be captured by the idea of technological rationality.

Implied by the idea of technological rationality is the existence of a core set of characteristics that runs through a variety of types of action. The meaningful use of the expression "technological rationality" would demand that its criteria of application serve to exclude some rationales for action while including others and serve to delimit features of the phenomenon that allow for its identification and reidentification. So, presupposed by the idea is our ability analytically to isolate such a core or at least indicate intelligible connections among families of such characteristics.

Though its origin can be traced to the Aristotelian notion of *techne*, or making, the conceptual genealogy of technological rationality stems perhaps most directly from Max Weber's analysis of action types in modern societies. Weber put forward a threefold distinction: what he called purposive-rational action was opposed to so-called valuerational action, and both were opposed to tradition-based action. Purposive rationality (*Zweckrationalität*) refers to the idea of assessing action from the point of view of its adequacy as a means to the realization of an agent's ends or goals. Value rationality (*Wertrationalität*) refers to the idea of assessing action from the point of view of its coherence with a value or norm held to be of intrinsic significance, regardless of the action's prospects for success in the attainment of a projected end or goal. The endoriented nature of technological or purposive rationality is then contrasted with a rationality that is oriented by a concern with the way in which an action is done or with the values embodied in it or by the norms governing it. Tradition-based action is determined by ingrained habituation and is typically not mediated by rational assessment. According to Weber, modernity is characterized by the increased scope given to instrumental or purposive rationality.

The idea of instrumental or purposive rationality and its social ramifications in late capitalism and in modern, post-industrial society became a central concern of the first generation of the German social theorists known as the Frankfurt School (Max Horkheimer, Theodor Adorno, Herbert Marcuse and others). They saw technological

rationality as essentially embodied in the purposeful organization and combination of productive techniques – directed either by public or private agents – that are aimed ultimately at more and more effective and efficient social control.2 To this instrumental rationality they opposed what they referred to as critical rationality, but without elaborating a rigorously systematic and coherent account of the latter. Jürgen Habermas – the most prominent member of the second generation of Frankfurt School social theorists – elaborated upon Weber's distinction, maintained that instrumental rationality does not exhaust modernity's rational potential, and opposed to this mode of rationality a systematic account of what he calls communicative rationality.

Habermas's conception of communicative rationality provides a backdrop for further delimiting the contours of technological rationality. Communicatively rational action is linguistically or symbolically mediated, is governed by norms that are shared by at least two agents, each of whom acknowledges the other's recognition of the norms, and is oriented towards seeking mutual understanding and agreement.3 This rationality that underlies reaching agreement with others in language is sharply distinguished from the rationality that underwrites successful intervention in the objective world based on knowledge of the causal determinants of processes in that world.

Other significant aspects of technological rationality come to the fore when we understand technology itself to be a response to our finitude, to the realization that we are vulnerable and mortal and that our time is limited. And technology has been a response to our finitude from the beginning. The earliest instances of tool-using in foraging societies were to "increase the reliability and productivity of . . . subsistence strateg[ies] by using time-saving devices."4 This suggests that time-saving is an important aim of technological rationalization.5 Indeed, it can be argued that the rationality that informs technological practice, by placing a premium on efficiency and control, encourages what can be called a domestication of time, a reduction of time to manipulable, interchangeable and dispensable units geared toward future goals.6

All technological ends, be they proximate or remote, have their origin in some object of human need or desire. Our capacities and desires, e.g. for communication, health, transportation, nourishment, security, entertainment, shelter, comfort etc., will ultimately constitute the hermeneutic grid in terms of which the point of any technology can be understood. In this sense, though technology may generate possibilities that we have not envisioned, its significance derives ultimately from our nature and values. However, when those values become ends of technology, they are translated into the realm of technics, and various branches of technology coalesce around them, e.g. mechanical engineering, electronics, civil engineering, agriculture, etc. And, when those ends become the guiding criteria for the various sectors of technology, the ends and the technologies associated with them will form a relatively autonomous domain. The technologically rational gaze is guided by an end that has been articulated in terms commensurate with the particular technology in question. For instance, in medicine one typically speaks in terms of halting the progress of a specific biomedically defined disease rather than, say, in terms invoking the concept of health, where health is understood to involve social and cultural as well as medical dimensions.

Technological rationality is a pure rationality of function, focused exclusively on the relation of means to ends. Technology's animating rationality restricts the scope of its deliberation to means–end thinking, to a species of calculation dedicated to maximizing economy and efficiency, with respect to time and effort, in the realization of ends. So "technological rationality" refers to that view of reason which focuses its attention exclusively upon the adequacy of means for the realization of ends, where those ends are not themselves subject to non-strategic rational adjudication, and to the notion of progress that is consistent with this view.

We can think of technology itself as a social phenomenon that embodies at once a distinctive cognitive style or orientation, a distinctive mode of action, and a distinctive way of taking up with the world. Accordingly, a useful core characterization of technological rationality is to think of it as a species of problem-solving rationality whereby we make use of the environment to satisfy our wants and desires. Worldly objects, and time itself, are instrumentally interpreted as potentially manipulable units to be orchestrated in the interest of achieving the goals at hand.7 The set of knowledge, skills and instruments that are the most efficient and effective at problem-solving are the distinctive products of this mode of rationality.8 We can characterize the way technology addresses its problems, or the technological approach, in the following way: a need is made explicit, or an opportunity, made available by scientific or perhaps other technological developments, is articulated; within the context of the need or opportunity, a clear and determinate goal is specified; the major steps to be taken and the major pieces of work to be done are identified; the plan is constantly made responsive to "feedback" from the results of the work; and, typically, the work is organized so that each major segment is apportioned within a division of labor.9 This way of putting it highlights the important point that the end that technology seeks to realize as efficiently and effectively as possible is one that is specifiable and determinate beforehand. It further highlights the importance to the technological enterprise of planning, of the rational orchestration of procedure. The rationality of technology aims at the reduction of contingency and uncertainty via the mastery of instrumentalities and time through planning and ordering.

Hence, while there are historically contingent features of technological practices, we can, without unduly essentializing technology, also locate features that are, at least relatively speaking, historically invariant, features that survive social and historical transformations, features that enable us to identify and re-identify a practice or some aspect of it as technological in virtue of an underlying rationality. Among these are: (1) the separation of means and ends and (2) the rationalization of the means for the efficient procurement of ends. To summarize, we might think of technology, then, as the set of purposively rationalized practices aimed at putting the future at our disposal.

To say that technology can be viewed as that constellation of knowledge, processes, skills and products whose aim is rationally to control and transform is to raise the question of the relation between technological and scientific rationality. We often think that technology's promise of control is fulfilled by cashing in on the cognitive achievements of science. But what, exactly, is technology's relationship to science? An adequate account of *this* distinction will have to acknowledge that there is considerable overlap between what persons identified as scientists and those identified as technologists do. It has been remarked that it is often difficult to differentiate research scientists from research engineers based upon observation of them at work.10 So, if our demarcation criteria are to be sensitive to actual practice, it would be advisable to think perhaps in terms of a spectrum of activities, interests and kinds of knowledge rather than in terms of

sharp dichotomies and to acknowledge that the science/technology "border" is rather fluid. The end points of such a spectrum should be understood then to designate features more akin to those of an ideal type than to those of an actual practice. But those termini will be useful for talking about scientific or technological *aspects* of a practice or in speaking of a more or less scientific or technological practice.

The most useful and least contested way of characterizing what lies at the end points is to do so in terms of ultimate aims. Scientific practice aims at increasing our knowledge of the natural and social worlds by offering explanations of phenomena. Technological practice aims at solving the material problems of human life by increasing our power to transform those worlds. An adequate attempt to differentiate between the scientific and the technological, then, must take its orientation from an acknowledgment that science's aim is primarily cognitive, while technology's is primarily practical.11

We turn, finally, to the conception of progress that is consonant with the account of technological rationality presented here. The primary measure of technological progress is granted by the imperative to maximize effectiveness (reliability, durability, strength, ease of use, etc.) and efficiency in the securing of a given end. (Increased efficiency can be achieved either through the discovery of more productive ways – yielding more for a given "cost" or input – or more "economical" modes – providing the same yield for less input – of securing an end.) A further and highly salient mark of technological progress is the abbreviation of the time necessary for such a securing.12

Social constructivists will point out that the evolution of technology itself is underdetermined by the principle of technological rationality articulated here. For that principle is reached by abstracting or disembedding technology from the contexts wherein particular technologies are actually deployed. To render a full account of such contexts of use, socially and historically informed analyses that examine the social and historical specificity of technological systems must also be brought to bear.

#### Notes

- 1. See, for instance, Feenberg (1995), Feenberg (1999) and Ihde (1990).
- 2. Leiss (1972).
- 3. Habermas (1970), p. 92.
- 4. Zvelebil (1984), p. 314, cited in DeGregori (1985), p. 14.
- 5. See also DeGregori (1985), pp. 14 ff.
- 6. Simpson (1995), p. 4.
- 7. On the idea of encountering the world as a resource for manipulation and use (*Bestand*), see Heidegger (1977).
- 8. DeGregori (1985), p. 37.
- 9. See Kranzberg and Pursell (1967), p. 18.
- 10. Hughes (1976), p. 651; and O. Mayr (1976), p. 667. Further complicating this problem is the fact that what at a given time is taken to be the science–technology distinction may be in part a social construction, may be determined by what society judges to be practical and irrelevant to practice at a given time. See Reingold and Molella (1976), p. 629, and Mayr (1976), p. 664.
- 11. See Bunge (1972), pp. 63, 68–70. Those who would reject the salience of the cognitive/ practical distinction here – and that would include both those whose view of science is

informed by some version of instrumentalism or pragmatism and those influenced by some trends within the Frankfurt School of critical theory or in the thought of Husserl, Heidegger and Max Scheler – and who would claim that science itself is but a device for technical control and manipulation, face the challenge of giving an adequate account of the different criteria of success that characterize what are generally acknowledged to be the distinguishable enterprises of science and technology. Though social values may influence what gets brought under scientific scrutiny, the purely scientific will is ultimately "disinterested" in the specific sense that it is not wed to a particular experimental outcome. For it, the "pressures of life" are bracketed or neutralized (though they may not be for an individual scientist). The technological will is not disinterested in this sense. Even fundamental engineering research – basic scientific research with an eye to practical payoff – is committed to finding corroborated scientific claims that may prove *useful* (see Agassi [1980], p. 93). If we, with Karl Popper, agree that science progresses by, and ultimately seeks, falsifications or refutations, then we can distinguish the criteria of scientific success from even those of fundamental engineering research. The commitment to truth on the part of the scientific community is sufficiently strong (at least in principle and ideally) to redeem the self-negation of a refutation. Though a post-empiricist such as Thomas Kuhn might contest this claim, my point is that at least it can be *argued* in the case of science, because of its cognitive commitment. But it cannot be argued in the case of technology, because of its commitment to success in reliably altering the world. While refutations are cognitive achievements, and are for this reason "suffered" by science, they signify failure in the practical arena (see Popper [1963], pp. 112–14, and Agassi [1980], pp. 94–8).

Tendencies to conflate science and technology are often predicated upon an uncritical identification of truth and usefulness. For example, often the distinction is not made between the success of laboratory operations and the success of practical operations in the overdetermined world outside the laboratory. The practical, real-world success or failure of a scientific theory is not, in general, an index of its truth, or even of its warranted assertibility. There are many cases of false scientific theories being of great practical use. One need think only of the usefulness of Ptolemaic cosmography for navigational calculations. Or of N. A. Otto's successful internal combustion engine which turned out to be based upon false theoretical assumptions (see Bryant [1966]). There are a number of reasons for this: (1) either the false part of the theory is not used in the deduction that informs the technological application or the false part has no practical consequences; (2) because the emphasis in technology is upon using knowledge to achieve a real-world goal rather than on "stepping back" in order to achieve cognitive security, the levels of precision demanded in practice are often far lower than that demanded in scientific research, where precision is an element of a theory's falsifiability; and (3), in real situations, relevant variables are seldom adequately known and precisely controlled, for in the domain of practice timely and effective action is much too strongly urged to permit the detailed study necessary to isolate and assess relevant independent variables (see Bunge [1972], pp. 65–6). Theory choice in science, no matter how little it is algorithmically governed or how much it is value-laden, remains an epistemic affair. Technology's concern with extra-epistemic values such as reliability, safety, standardization and speed at the possible expense of depth, scope, accuracy, and fruitfulness for further research programs make its criteria of success rather different from those of science (see Bunge [1972], p. 76). An epistemically promising new theory may well be rejected in favor of a less promising but less risky alternative.

Even if one argues, as was Habermas' wont, that the technical interest underlies science's projection of its object domain, we can still acknowledge the distinction of the two enterprises at the level of their self-understanding, a distinction that accounts for different criteria of success and hence observable differences in institutional dynamics. This

- is a distinction that our universities neglect at their peril in the current rush toward corporate sponsorship of research. For a fuller discussion of some of the issues broached here, see Simpson (1983).
- 12. See Skolimowski, H. (1972), p. 44.

### References and Further Reading

- Agassi, J. (1980). "Between Science and Technology," *Philosophy of Science*, 47: 82–99.
- Bryant, L. (1966). "The Silent Otto," *Technology and Culture*, 7: 184–200.
- Bunge, M. (1972). "Toward a Philosophy of Technology," in C. Mitcham and R. Mackey (eds), *Philosophy and Technology: Readings in the Philosophical Problems of Technology* (New York: The Free Press).
- DeGregori, T. (1985). *A Theory of Technology* (Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University Press).
- Feenberg, A. (1995). *Alternative Modernity: The Technical Turn in Philosophy and Social Theory* (Los Angeles, Calif.: University of California Press).
- Feenberg, A. (1999). *Questioning Technology* (London/New York: Routledge).
- Habermas, J. (1970). "Technology and Science as 'Ideology'," in *Toward a Rational Society*, trans. Jeremy J. Shapiro (Boston, Mass.: Beacon Press).
- Heidegger, M. (1977). "The Question Concerning Technology," in *The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays*, trans. William Lovitt (New York: Harper).
- Hughes, T. P. (1976). "The Science–Technology Interaction: The Case of High-Voltage Power Transmission Systems," *Technology and Culture*, 17: 646–62.
- Ihde, D. (1990). *Technology and the Lifeworld* (Bloomington/Indianapolis, Ind.: Indiana University Press).
- Kranzberg, M. and Pursell, C. (eds) (1967). *Technology in Western Civilization*, Vol. 2 (New York: Oxford University Press).
- Leiss, W. (1972). "Technological Rationality: Marcuse and His Critics," *Philosophy of the Social Sciences*, 2: 31–42.
- Mayr, O. (1976). "The Science–Technology Relationship as a Historiographical Problem," *Technology and Culture*, 17: 663–73.
- Popper, K. R. (1963). *Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge* (London: Routledge).
- Reingold, N. and Molella, A. (1976). "Introduction" to papers reprinted from "The Interaction of Science and Technology in the Industrial Age," *Technology and Culture*, 17: 624–33.
- Simpson, L. C. (1983). "Critical Remarks Concerning Marcuse's Notion of Science," *Philosophy of the Social Sciences*, 13: 451–63.
- Simpson, L. C. (1995). *Technology, Time and the Conversations of Modernity* (London/New York: Routledge).
- Skolimowski, H. (1972). "The Structure of Thinking in Technology," in C. Mitcham and R. Mackey (eds), *Philosophy and Technology: Readings in the Philosophical Problems of Technology* (New York: The Free Press).
- Weber, M. (1968). "Basic Sociological Terms," in G. Ross and C. Wittich (eds), *Economy and Society* (New York: Bedminister Press).
- Zvelebil, M. ( 1984). "Clues to Recent Human Evolution from Specialized Technologies," *Nature*, 307 (5949): 314–15.
