---
images: []
order: 132
title: EVAN SELINGER
---

Dating back at least as far as Plato's writings on *techne*, issues of expertise have been vexing for quite some time. Today, they have become inter-disciplinary topics that are widely acknowledged as having profound social and political consequences as well as decidedly epistemic and normative dimensions.

For example:

Questions about how to identify experts and when to defer to them remain daunting. The problem of whether genuine expertise can be distinguished from its social markers cuts across and even reshapes disciplinary boundaries. The conundrum of how to classify and organize different kinds of expertise traverses descriptive and prescriptive terrain.

While scientific and technological authority remain at the forefront of the expertise debates, phenomenological concerns, such as the nature and scope of skill acquisition and embodied action, also occupy a central role. Matters of discretionary power, media bias, litigation and shared governance occupy center stage as well. Here's why.

In the abstract, it is easy to see experts as special kinds of people whose relation to knowledge, skill and experience entitles them to respect. In an increasingly specialized age in which information is rapidly proliferating and scientific research is delegated to teams of inquirers, it seems rather difficult for people to acquire in-depth understanding of multiple specialized fields. And, while the division of labor makes it incumbent to diversify and proliferate talents, skills, interests and training, individuals appear to benefit from the ease of consumerism – from being able to use electronic and mechanical devices, as well as applied medical technologies, without obtaining a sophisticated understanding of how the means of production and distribution relate to the ends of use and habituation.

Despite the gains that result from managing "resources" and "ignorance" in this way, experts have increasingly become subject to critical scrutiny and distrust. Scandals, such as that surrounding Hwang Woo Suk's false claims about cloning research, have reminded the public that integrity can be marred by competition, and that the standards maintained by the current peer-review process are imperfect. Beyond blatant instances of unethical conduct, more subtle problems concerning bias and ideology remain. By considering the following problematic but widely discussed cases, some of these issues can be crystallized.

Recent debates over global warming and "natural" disasters highlight the difficulty of disentangling scientific judgment from political ideology. When considering the same "evidence," some find economic motivations and racism at play, while others counter that such accusations are rooted in a misunderstanding of natural causes. This tension is not relegated to esoteric academic musings. Caustic versions abound in mainstream media coverage of the Kyoto Protocol, Hurricane Katrina and other related topics.

Controversy between advocates of intelligent design and natural evolution has raised anew questions about how science and religion might be demarcated from one another. The complexities of these debates have even called into question what counts as a secular and what counts as a religious perspective. In challenging scientific authority, some have gone so far as to denounce proponents of natural selection as "high priests of Science." Moreover, heated exchange has been prompted over the role that public opinion should play in shaping the curriculums that guide taxpayer-funded education.

The issue of medical objectivity continues to grab headlines, with particular emphasis being given to psychological diagnoses and alternative medical therapies. With hot topics such as cancer, depression, Attention Deficit Disorder, chiropractic care, and homeopathic remedies, the problem of how to distinguish sound clinical classification from economic motivation and cultural bias seems destined to be caught in interminable dispute. So, too, does the difficulty of deciding how to evaluate first-person accounts of successful treatment that differ from reports derived from more "objective" "evidence-based" approaches. Indeed, the financial success of Airborne – a dietary supplement "invented" by a former elementary-school teacher that putatively helps fight cold symptoms – illustrates that, in some instances, people are less interested in independent scientific evidence than they are in "folksy" markers of trust. Suspicion of the greed exhibited by the mainstream pharmaceutical industry – fanned, for example, by the recent Vioxx lawsuits and trials – may be pertinent here as well.

With respect to legal matters, the famous 1993 US Supreme Court case, *Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals* was an attempt to construct a practical solution to the difficult problem of screening out junk science. Unfortunately, questions about its effectiveness remain. Some claim that it has had a tendency to produce expensive and time-consuming pretrial hearings that discourage the kind of sound gatekeeping that the decision was intended to establish. Others worry that the case inadvertently created new obstacles for sorting through competing claims made on behalf of frontier and mainstream researchers. Beyond these issues, additional reflections have questioned whether due process itself is compromised by the manner in which juries assess expert testimony. Finally, phenomenologists have questioned whether expert testimony, in general, is predicated upon a performance in which intuitive understanding remains hidden and rationalization dominates.

The expertise debates continue to generate momentum in discussions about the advantages and disadvantages that have arisen in connection with new computer practices of acquiring and disseminating information. For example, long-standing convictions about credentials are being challenged by advocates of *Wikipedia,* an online encyclopedia that is not driven by content experts, and whose entries can be altered by essentially anyone who desires to change them. While instances of error and even fraud have been

#### evan selinger

discovered, *Nature* recently concluded that *Wikipedia* and the *Encyclopedia Britannica* have nearly comparable levels of accuracy. Furthermore, as debates about reports occurring on blogs have allegedly brought traditional reporting to the threshold of a crisis, intrigue into the collaborative categorization of information by means of using social software to "index" information instead of "classifying" it has raised powerful questions concerning who has the right to manage data. At the heart of these debates may very well be confusion about fundamental relations between knowledge, skill and experience. This is evidenced by the fact that questions about the prerequisites for expert judgment are now being raised. How much firsthand experience is necessary to be an expert? What kind of training is required to be an expert? These queries are, perhaps, only in their embryonic stages. They should shape the debates for some time to come.

Finally, it should be noted that, in some of the literature on indigenous culture, the very notion of expertise has become synonymous with Western imperialism. The central idea conveyed in this context is that, even when well intentioned, much of the "development" work that is undertaken to address the poverty of "developing" regions remains chauvinistic. As a consequence of advocating particular models of efficiency, it is alleged, the traditional skills are unfairly devalued and traditional forms of life are mischaracterized as backward. Moshoeshoe II expresses this point clearly in the context of interventions in Africa when he writes:

"Experts" have shown a total disregard and ignorance of Africa's long-established and successful methods to ensure their survival and well-being. . . . Such "experts" have also failed to understand either the social or ecological base of the cultural practices on which they seek to impose their externally derived solutions, constructed in an entirely different socioeconomic and ecological context. The result is that many of their agricultural strategies and environmental solutions have proved disastrous for the people, wildlife, and natural environment of Africa.
