---
images: []
order: 134
title: DON IHDE
---

A major group of technologies in the contemporary world is unquestionably that of the imaging technologies, so important for artistic, scientific, communication and entertainment activities. The production of images by humans can be traced at least back to the Ice Ages – excellent images of animal life 34,000 bp were found in Chauvet, France. And, since, in this entry, both visual and auditory image technologies will be featured, a bear-bone flute associated with a Neanderthal site has been dated back to 45,000 bp. These visualizations and acoustic sounds were "hand produced" with minimalist technologies such as pigments and brushes and the bear-bone musical instrument.

More complex imaging processes arise in antiquity, and the best-known of these imaging processes – at least in the West – is probably the shadow theater imagined by Plato and known as the "allegory of the cave." Here a light source (fire) casts the shadows of cut-out objects upon the cave wall (screen) somewhat like an Indonesian puppet shadow theater. And, although it is unknown whether Plato knew of the *camera obscura,* Aristotle and Euclid did (2350 bp); and Mo-Tzu, a Chinese mathematician, knew of it and described it approximately a century earlier (2450 bp), although its complete description and the science of its optics was described later by the Arab philosopher Al Hazen (1070 bp).

The *camera obscura* and its variants stand at the beginnings of a very long and complex technological trajectory of image-producing machines. The *camera* – early examples were usually room-sized – depends upon an external light source (sun or artificial), an aperture (at first hole, later with lenses) and a blank screen upon which is cast an upside-down image in two dimensions. And, although known in antiquity, possibly used to view eclipses, such devices became a popular part of the optical toolkits of the Renaissance in Europe. Alberti, da Vinci and many other artists of the fifteenth century used a *camera.*<sup>1</sup> Indeed, one tendency in the Renaissance seems to have been the increased instrumentalization of many human practices. The *camera*  and other visual framing devices assisted in the development of so-called Renaissance perspective, but in music the earlier and mostly *a cappella* vocal music sung in sacred contexts was in this same period undergoing much instrumental development as well, with all the main families of instruments – brass, winds, strings and percussion – represented.

Thus what we call early modern science in the seventeenth century arrived in an already instrumentalized culture. Early science, too, had its visualization technologies, most notably optical ones with the adaptation of earlier lens uses such as eyeglasses, later compounded into telescopes and microscopes.2 Now, in a strict phenomenological sense, telescopes and microscopes, particularly if hand-held and without some added imaging device, are not yet fully imaging technologies. The "images" of Galileo's new telescopic discoveries – (*a*) the mountains of the Moon, (*b*) the satellites of Jupiter, (*c*) the phases of Venus – were produced as images through his own drawings thereof (and Galileo had a rather remarkable hand at drawing). The one exception – (*d* ) sunspots – was produced by his invention of a *helioscope*, that is the casting of an image through the telescope on to an attached small screen, thus turning the telescope into a *camera obscura* variant. The seventeenth century also saw considerable development of acoustic inventions and experimentation. Large, separated hearing horns helped for long-range and stereo-directed hearing, echo chambers and spy devices were architecturally designed, as well as further musical instrumentation development.3

The eighteenth century produced yet more variants upon the *camera,* including the additions of focusable lenses, but also the replacement of a lens by a prism by Isaac Newton, producing spectra instead of isomorphic images, which, with the nineteenth century development of a slit instead of a round hole or its lensed variant, led to spectroscopy by the nineteenth century.

The nineteenth century then accelerates the continuum of imaging technologies. *Camera obscurae* undergo developments as "box" devices, lensed and focusable; and, although preceded with a few experiments to "fix" *camera* images with silver salts, Louis Daguerre improves upon the earlier processes and the *photographic camera* is invented and its processes publicized in 1839.4 Not far behind are acoustic imaging processes which can *record* sounds – Thomas Edison invents the first cylinder mechanical recording technology in 1877. Both photography and phonography are quickly adapted to art, science, entertainment and communication practices in the entire industrial world.

It should be noted at this point that both visual and auditory imaging processes remained limited to *optical light* for vision and to the humanly hearable range of sound waves for recordings. The next plateau is reached once electricity becomes manipulatable. By the 1830s experimentation in electromagnetic processes yielded the first *dynamos* or electric current generators, thus laying the basis for electric and electronic imaging processes. Manipulation of what came to be known as the electromagnetic spectrum (EMS hereafter) opened the way to levels of emission detection both above and below the previous imaging ranges. Radioactive wave propagation through the use of cathode tubes led Wilhelm Roentgen to the discovery of X-ray imaging in 1895.5 Noticing a glow from his cathode ray tube, he discovered that this strange light-like source could actually pass through his hand and cast a shadow-like image of his hand bones upon a plate – he later used a "shadowgraph" of his wife's hand with her ring to advertise his discovery.

This brings us to the twentieth century and what can now be recognized as the century beginning an explosive image technology revolution. Still photography evolved into cinema – later, with audio-visual combinations, to become "talkies" – to which one must add early radio and improved electrically produced sound recordings. By mid-century one can add television to cinema, many varieties of sound recording to radio and records, and communication versions of imaging technologies such as cable (wired) and radio (wireless) imaging. Then, later in the century, the further development of the electronic computer with its variant versions also becomes widespread. By century's end the "screen" is omnipresent.

Contemporary imaging technologies are qualitatively different in capacity from the predecessor technologies into the nineteenth century. Four such distinctive capacities may be noted:

Contemporary imaging technologies and the associated systems of emission detection – at least since the capacity to detect and image EMS frequencies beyond human optical light and human auditory perception – can now detect and image, with particular technologies, the full known range of the EMS. This capacity is probably most important in the sciences. For example, until the twentieth century *all astronomy was limited to observations within the optical light spectrum.*<sup>6</sup> With the accidental discovery of radio astronomy earlier in the century, and then the later imaging processes now possible, ranging from very short gamma ray to very long radio wave detection and imaging, the entire picture of the cosmos has changed. And, while early photography made time manipulation possible through faster exposure times – from Muybridge's time studies to Edgerton's stroboscopic images – it was not until X-rays and other "penetrating" technologies such as ground-penetrating radar that imaging could show interior structures. Today, this capacity is particularly important in medicine with the range of imaging running from X-ray to Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) to Positron Emission Tomography (PET). At this now breaking of human perceptual limits, typical imaging is developed from "slices" of the EMS. In astronomy, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope contains a number of different cameras, attuned to different slices of the EMS. There is also the Chandra X-ray source telescope and others in a list too long to mention. Results are the now familiar images of Martian water erosion, Venusian mounts, and the ice surface of Europa. It is to be noted, however, that all such imaging from beyond human perceptual limits *translates* its imagery back into experienceable visualizations which include gestalt shapes, and "false colors."

The second capacity of contemporary imaging arises from the simultaneous development of computational technologies embodied in the electronic computer. The capacity to transform data into image, and its reversibility to transform image into data, produces a new set of imaging possibilities. A space probe taking any number of image technology slices – say, of a Martian surface – has the result first transformed into transmissible data to send back to the earthbound receiving station; and, once received, the data is transformed back into an image. More mundanely, this is also the process familiar to those who send digital photos over the Internet. Data, however, can also be reconstructed according to algorithms – as in fractal and chaos phenomena – to produce images which were not previously "imaged."

Third, contemporary imaging has a wide range of *constructibility* built into it. Computational processes include *tomography,* such that, for example, one can at one level "dial in" different sets of frequencies. MRI scans are typically taken of multiple slices through a brain, for example, at different frequencies and composed into the multiple images used by the neurologist. Or one can also do a *composite* through tomography of MRI, PET and CAT imaging to produce a more complete three-dimensional image of a possible brain tumor. Also included in such constructibility are both the rotational and slice capacities such that virtual anatomy and other virtual practices may be undertaken on the basis of imagery manipulation. One may add here, too, the development of holography and other three-dimensional imaging which is under current development.

The final contemporary imaging capacity to be noted here is what could be called *complexity* imaging, which is precisely what is also known as *modeling* and *simulation.* First used in the modeling of a complex atomic reaction during the development of the atomic bomb (Monte Carlo simulations), modeling and simulation is today a rapidly growing set of practices which include graphic modeling of global warming, hurricane simulation models, complex industrial processes and a whole range of similar complex phenomena visualized in computational gestalts.

Although this entry has concentrated on scientific imaging, the burgeoning of similar imaging in the arts, communications, contemporary media and entertainment is parallel. Indeed, artists using such imaging processes have also discovered that the capacity to transform data to image, and its reversal, also has a different potential. One can turn data into *either* a visualization *or* an acoustic image. Thus various performance artists have turned hurricane models into "music," and others have with time compression and data into acoustic form produced sound patterns of weather "songs" and the like.7

#### Notes

- 1. David Hockney's *Secret Knowledge: Rediscovering the Lost Techniques of the Old Masters*  (New York: Penguin Putnam, 2001) may have shocked some of the art world in its claims concerning the use of the *camera obscura* in Renaissance art practice, but historians of technology had been familiar with this fact as a commonplace for decades.
- 2. Lenses for uses in eyeglasses were common in Europe by the thirteenth century and, similarly, were also in use in China.
- 3. An interdisciplinary group located at the Free University of Berlin produced a major study of instruments in both art and science in the seventeenth century; see Ludgar Schwarte, Helmar Schrum and Walther Lazarzig, *Instrumente in Kunst und Wissenschaft* (Berlin: Walter de Greuter, 2006).
- 4. Joseph Niepce had used silver salts to fix photographic images before Daguerre, but Daguerre perfected the process and published his results in 1869 – photography as a technology was immediately adopted in the industrial world of the time and its use in science through connecting a photographic camera to both standard and spectroscopic telescopes occurred within a year of Daguerre's publication.
- 5. A full account of medical imaging, from the X-ray on, may be found in Betty Ann Kevles, *Naked to the Bone* (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1998).
- 6. See Nigel Henbest and Michael Marten, *The New Astronomy*, 2nd edn (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996). The new astronomy is a term applied to EMS frequencies beyond the optical spectrum.
- 7. Andrea Polli from Hunter College developed the technique of turning model data into acoustic recordings, and Felix Hess has developed a series of time-compressed acoustic records of both natural and socially produced imaged sound.

### References and Further Reading

Galison, P. (1997). *Image and Logic* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).

Giere, R. (2006). *Scientific Perspectivalism* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).

Ihde, D. (1998). *Expanding Hermeneutics: Visualism in Science* (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press).

Latour, B. and Weibel, P. (2002). *Iconoclash* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
