---
images: []
order: 136
title: JEAN-PIERRE DUPUY
---

All the fears of our age seem to have found shelter in one word: precaution. Yet the conceptual underpinnings of the notion of precaution are extremely fragile.

Let us recall the definition of the precautionary principle formulated in the Maastricht treaty:

The absence of certainties, given the current state of scientific and technological knowledge, must not delay the adoption of effective and proportionate preventive measures aimed at forestalling a risk of grave and irreversible damage to the environment at an economically acceptable cost.

A first serious deficiency which hamstrings the notion of precaution is that it does not properly gauge *the type of uncertainty* with which we are confronted at present. The very formulation of the precautionary principle makes it clear that it places itself from the outset within the framework of epistemic uncertainty, i.e. a form of uncertainty that resides in the mind of the knowing subject rather than in the objective properties of the outside world. The presupposition is that we know we are in a situation of uncertainty. It is an axiom of epistemic logic that if I do not know *p*, then I know that I do not know *p*. Yet, as soon as we depart from this framework, we must entertain the possibility that we do not know that we do not know something. In cases where the uncertainty is such that it entails that the uncertainty itself is uncertain, it is impossible to know whether or not the conditions for the application of the precautionary principle have been met. If we apply the principle to itself, it will invalidate itself before our eyes.

Moreover, "given the current state of scientific and technological knowledge" implies that a scientific research effort could overcome the uncertainty in question, the existence of which is viewed as purely contingent. It is a safe bet that a "precautionary policy" will inevitably include the edict that research efforts must be pursued – as if the gap between what is known and what needs to be known could be filled by a supplementary effort on the part of the knowing subject. But it is not uncommon to encounter cases in which the progress of knowledge comports an increase in uncertainty for the decision-maker, something which is inconceivable within the framework of epistemic uncertainty. Sometimes, to learn more is to discover hidden complexities that make us realize that the mastery we thought we had over phenomena was in part illusory.

However, the most important reason that leads us to deem the precautionary principle an insufficient tool if we are to confront the new threats that put the survival of humankind in jeopardy is that, by placing the emphasis on scientific *uncertainty*, it utterly misconstrues the nature of the obstacle that keeps us from acting in the face of catastrophe. The obstacle is not uncertainty, scientific or otherwise; the obstacle is *the impossibility of believing that the worst is going to occur.*

Even when it is known that it is going to take place (think of global warming), a catastrophe is not credible: that is the principal obstacle. On the basis of numerous examples, an English researcher identified what he called an "inverse principle of risk evaluation": the propensity of a community to recognize the existence of a risk seems to be determined by the extent to which it thinks that solutions exist. To call into question what we have learned to view as progress would have such phenomenal repercussions that we do not believe we are facing catastrophe.

In addition to psychology, the question of future catastrophe brings into play a whole metaphysics of temporality. The world experienced the tragedy of 11 September 2001 less as the introduction into reality of something senseless, and therefore impossible, than as the sudden transformation of an impossibility into a possibility. The worst horror has now become possible, one sometimes heard it said. If it *has become* possible, then it was not possible before. And yet, common sense objects, if it happened, then it must have *been* possible.

French philosopher Henri Bergson describes the weird feeling of easiness and relief he experienced on 4 August 1914 when he learned that Germany had declared war on France. This uncanny familiarity contrasted sharply with the feelings that prevailed *before* the catastrophe. War then appeared to Bergson "*at one and the same time* as probable and as impossible: a complex and contradictory idea, which persisted right up to the fateful date."

In reality, Bergson deftly untangles this apparent contradiction. The explanation comes when he reflects on the work of art: "I believe it will ultimately be thought obvious that the artist *creates the possible at the same time as the real* when he brings his work into being," he writes. This reflection is no less valid in the case of a catastrophe.

Catastrophes are characterized by a temporality that is in some sense inverted. As an event bursting forth out of nothing, the catastrophe becomes possible only by making itself possible while becoming real. And that is precisely the source of our problem. For, if one is to prevent a catastrophe, one needs to believe in its possibility *before* it occurs. If, on the other hand, one succeeds in preventing it, its non-realization maintains it in the realm of the impossible; and, as a result, the prevention efforts will appear useless in retrospect.

It is this spontaneous metaphysics of the temporality of catastrophes that is the chief obstacle to the definition of a form of prudence adapted to our time. The concept of "enlightened doomsaying" proposes a solution founded on an antidote to that same metaphysics. The idea is to project oneself into the future and look back at our present and evaluate it from there. This temporal *loop* between future and past defines the metaphysics of *projected time*. It makes sense only if one accepts that the future is not only real but also fixed. The possible exists only in present and future actuality, and this actuality is itself a necessity.1 More precisely, before the catastrophe occurs, it can *not* occur; it is in occurring that it begins to have always been necessary, and therefore that the non-catastrophe, which was possible, begins to have always been impossible. This metaphysics consists in *projecting oneself* into the time following the catastrophe, and in retrospectively seeing in the latter an event *at once necessary and improbable.* The (im)probability of a necessary event is no longer the measure of an ignorance that might have some chance of being only provisional (*uncertainty*). It is an element of reality, a reality that is not entirely determinate (*indeterminacy*).

The paradox of "enlightened doomsaying" presents itself as follows. To make the prospect of a catastrophe credible, one must increase the ontological force of its inscription in the future. But to do this with too much success would be to lose sight of the goal, which is precisely to raise awareness and spur action so that the catastrophe *does not take place.*

In projected time, the future is taken to be fixed, which means that any event that is not part of the present or the future is an impossible event. It immediately follows that, in projected time, prudence can never take the form of prevention (of which precaution is just a particular instance). Prevention assumes that the undesirable event that one prevents is an unrealized possibility. The event must be possible for us to have a reason to act; but if our action is effective it will not take place. This is unthinkable within the framework of projected time.

To foretell the future in projected time, it is necessary to seek the loop's fixed point, where an expectation (on the part of the past with regard to the future) and a causal production (of the future by the past) coincide. The predictor, knowing that his prediction is going to produce causal effects in the world, must take account of this fact if he wants the future to confirm what he foretold. Traditionally, which is to say in a world dominated by religion, this is the role of the prophet, and especially that of the biblical prophet. However, we are speaking of prophecy here in a purely secular and technical sense. The prophet is the one who, more prosaically, seeks out the *fixed point* of the problem, *the point where voluntarism achieves the very thing that fatality dictates*. The prophecy includes itself in its own discourse; it sees itself realizing what it announces as destiny.

The French planning system as it was once conceived by Pierre Massé constitutes the best example of what it means to foretell the future in projected time. It "aimed to obtain through consultations and research an image of the future sufficiently optimistic to be desirable and sufficiently credible to trigger the actions that would bring about its own realization."2 It is easy to see that this definition can make sense only within the metaphysics of projected time, whose characteristic loop between past and future it describes perfectly. Here coordination is achieved on the basis of an *image* of the future capable of ensuring a closed loop between the causal production of the future and the self-fulfilling expectation of it.

The paradox of the doomsayer's solution to the problem posed by the threats hanging over humanity's future is now in place. It is a matter of achieving coordination on the basis of a negative project taking the form of a fixed future *which one does not want.* One might try to transpose the former definition into the following terms: "to obtain through scientific futurology and a meditation on human goals an image of the future sufficiently catastrophic to be repulsive and sufficiently credible to trigger the actions that would block its realization" – but this formulation would seem to be hobbled from the outset by a prohibitive defect: self-contradiction. If one succeeds in avoiding the undesirable future, how can one say that coordination was achieved by fixing one's sights on that same future? The paradox is unresolved.

The problem is to see what type of fixed point is capable of ensuring the closure of the loop that links the future to the past in projected time. We know that the catastrophe cannot be this fixed point: the signals it would send back toward the past would trigger actions that would keep the catastrophic future from being realized. If the deterrent effect of the catastrophe worked perfectly, it would be self-obliterating. For the signals from the future to reach the past without triggering the very thing that would obliterate their source, there must subsist, inscribed in the future, an *imperfection in the closure of the loop.* The maxim for a rational form of doomsaying becomes: "to obtain . . . an image of the future sufficiently catastrophic to be repulsive and sufficiently credible to trigger the actions that would block its realization, *barring an accident*."

One may want to quantify the probability of this accident. Let us say that it is an epsilon, ε, by definition weak or very weak. The foregoing explanation can then be summed up very concisely: it is because there is a probability <sup>ε</sup> that the deterrence will not work that it works with a probability 1-ε. What might look like a tautology (it would obviously be one in our usual metaphysics) is absolutely not one here, since the preceding proposition is not true for <sup>ε</sup> = 0. The discontinuity at <sup>ε</sup> = 0 suggests that something like an indeterminacy principle is at work here. The probabilities <sup>ε</sup> and 1-<sup>ε</sup> behave like probabilities in quantum mechanics. The fixed point must be conceived as the *superposition* of two states, one being the accidental and preordained occurrence of the catastrophe, the other its non-occurrence.

The fact that the deterrence will not work with a strictly positive probability <sup>ε</sup> is what allows for the inscription of the catastrophe in the future, and it is this inscription that makes the deterrence effective, *with a margin of error* ε. Note that it would be quite incorrect to say that it is the *possibility* of the error, with the probability ε, that saves the effectiveness of the deterrence – as if the error and the absence of error constituted two paths branching out from a fork in the road. There are no branching paths in projected time. The error is not merely possible, it is actual: it is inscribed in time, rather like a slip of the pen. The future is written but it is partially indeterminate. It includes the catastrophe but as an accident.

#### Notes

- 1. The metaphysics of projected time rests on a novel solution to one of the oldest problems in metaphysics: Diodorus' Master Argument. See Vuillemin, J. (1996). *Necessity or Contingency: The Master Argument* (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University, CSLI Publications).
- 2. Guesnerie, R. (1996), *L'Economie de marché* (Paris: Flammarion). The phrasing reflects the spirit of rational expectations.
