---
images: []
order: 138
title: JEAN-PIERRE DUPUY
---

The positivist philosophy that drives most of modern science and technology (and much of contemporary philosophy) takes "metaphysics" to be a meaningless quest for answers to unanswerable questions; but Karl Popper, following the lead of Emile Meyerson, showed that there is no scientific (or, for that matter, technological) research program that does not rest on a set of general presuppositions about the structure of the world. To be sure, those metaphysical views are not empirically testable and they are not amenable to "falsification." However, that does not imply that they are not interesting, substantial, and that they do not play a fundamental role in the advancement of science. Those who deny metaphysics simply render it invisible, and it is very likely that their hidden metaphysics is bad or inconsistent. To the amazement of those who mistook him for a positivist, Karl Popper claimed that the philosopher or historian of science's task was twofold: first, unearth and make visible the metaphysical ideas that lie underneath scientific programs in order to make them amenable to criticism; second, proceed to a critical examination of those metaphysical theories, in a way that is different from the criticism of scientific theories, since no empirical testing is here possible, but nevertheless rational.

Two major philosophers from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries can be said to have fleshed out the metaphysics underlying the new science the budding of which they were witnessing: René Descartes and Giambattista Vico. Descartes saw science and technology as aiming at making man master and possessor of nature and of himself. More subtly, Vico gave the postulate of the "new science" (1725) a celebrated formulation: *Verum et factum convertuntur* ("The true and the made are convertible"). This means that we can have rational knowledge only about that of which we are the cause, about that which we ourselves have made. The principle of *verum factum* was originally understood as implying a want or lack on the part of human beings: we can never know nature in the way that God does, for God created what we can only observe. Quickly, however, the principle acquired a positive sense more in keeping with the growing affirmation of modern subjectivism: what human beings make can be rationally – that is, demonstratively and deductively – known despite the finiteness of human understanding. Among the branches of knowledge, ranked in descending order according to their degree of perfection, mathematics by this criterion of course comes first, followed, however, not by the natural sciences but by

the moral and political sciences, supposed to be more scientific because they deal with the products of human activity.

As regards the science of nature, however, its first principle, according to Hannah Arendt, had to be that one can know only in making or, rather, in remaking. Despite his human limitations, the scientist "nevertheless from the outset approached it [nature] from the standpoint of the One who made it."1 This explains not only the scientist's emphasis on the "how" of physical processes rather than on the being of things, but also the considerable role assigned by science to experiment.

With the looming advanced technologies, we shall be one big step further. I am thinking in particular of the so-called Nano-Bio-Info-Cogno (NBIC) convergence which presents itself as the ultimate culmination of the *verum factum*. It is no longer merely by doing experiments on it, it is no longer merely by modeling it, that men will now come to know nature. It is by *remaking* it. But, by the same token, it is no longer nature that they will come to know, but what they have made. Or, rather, it is the very idea of nature, and thus of a given that is exterior to the self, which will appear outmoded. The very distinction between knowing and making will lose all meaning with the NBIC convergence, as will the distinction that still exists today between the scientist and the engineer. Already today, in the case of biotechnologies, the distinction between discovery and invention, on which patent law rests, is proving increasingly tricky to maintain, as the debates about the patentability of life forms demonstrate.

Under this general heading, we can include what some philosophers call "the artificialization of Nature" and, in particular, of Life and the Mind. The metaphysical program that drives the NBIC convergence, a Promethean project if ever there was one, is to turn man into a demiurge or, scarcely more modestly, the "engineer of evolutionary processes." Biological evolution, with its clumsy tinkering, has often botched the job, and it cannot be especially proud of its latest handiwork, man. It is up to man himself, then, to try to do better. This puts him in the position of being the divine maker of the world, the demiurge, while at the same time condemning him to see himself as out of date. We are dealing here with an extraordinary paradox of the coincidence of opposites, which such philosophers as Martin Heidegger, Hannah Arendt or Günther Anders have brought out: the overweening ambition and pride of a certain scientific humanism leads straight to the obsolescence of man. It is in this broad perspective that we must always set the specific questions which are termed "ethical" and which touch on the engineering of man by man.

The human condition is an inextricable mixture of things given and things made. This means that man, to a great extent, can shape that which shapes him, condition that which conditions him, while still respecting the fragile equilibrium between the given and the made. Now, already in the 1950s, Arendt prophesied a human rebellion against the given. She wrote:

For some time now, a great many scientific endeavors have been directed toward making life also "artificial," toward cutting the last tie through which even man belongs among the children of nature. . . . This future man, whom the scientists tell us they will produce in no more than a hundred years, seems to be possessed by *a rebellion against human existence as it has been given*, a free gift from nowhere (secularly speaking), which he wishes to exchange, as it were, for something he has made himself.2

Indeed, the metaphysics of the NBIC convergence dreams of overcoming once and for all every given that is a part of the human condition, especially the finiteness of a human life – its mortality and its beginning in birth. If immortality has always had a place in man's thoughts or dreams, it is only very recently that death has come to be considered a "problem" which science and technology can solve by eliminating it. As for birth, the fact that we are born into the world without our having had anything to do with it has become a source of shame (Günther Anders). We discover that we have been *thrown* (the Heideggerian *Geworfenheit*) into the world and we feel abandoned. We experience forlornness when we realize that we are not the foundation of our own being. Technology fantasmatically promises a remedy for this feeling of nausea: (re)designing ourselves, partially or totally, as if we were our own machines.

At the heart of the metaphysical research program that drives much of contemporary technology, there is an enormous paradox. The metaphysics in question clearly wants to be *monist*: one would no longer say today that everything in the universe proceeds from the same *substance*, but one will say that everything is subject to the same *principles of organization*: nature, life and the mind. The watchword of cognitive science is "*naturalizing* the mind." It is a matter of fully restoring the mind (and life) to their proper place within the natural world. Now, it happens that the principles of organization supposed to be common to everything that exists in the universe are mechanistic principles. A device that processes information according to fixed rules, that is, the algorithm, constitutes the sole model of everything that exists. Chronologically, and despite what certain preconceptions might suggest, the mind was first to be assimilated to an algorithm (or Turing machine: McCulloch and Pitts's model, 1943); next was the turn of life, with the birth of molecular biology (Max Delbrück and the "phage group," 1949); and only later came the thesis that the laws of physics are recursive (or *Turing computable*). The naturalization of the mind thus merges with the mechanization of the mind.

Is the ambition to (re)make the world tantamount to *controlling* it, in keeping with Descartes' metaphysics? Thinking so would mean that one remains blind to a fundamental shift in the philosophy of contemporary technology. It is often the case that the philosophy implicit to a new field is given away, admittedly in a crude way, by its visionaries and ideologues. On this score it is difficult to be more explicit than Kevin Kelly when he writes: "It took us a long time to realize that the power of a technology is proportional to its inherent *out-of-controlness*, its inherent ability to surprise and be generative. In fact, unless we can worry about a technology, it is not revolutionary enough."3

In 1948, the great American mathematician John von Neumann, the inventor of game theory and automata theory, but also a major contributor to the design of the A- and H-bombs, prophesied that soon the builder of automata would find himself as helpless before his creation as we feel ourselves to be in the presence of complex natural phenomena. He was thus founding the so-called *bottom-up approach* that has become the landmark of nanotechnology. In keeping with that philosophy, the engineers of the future will no longer be the ones who devise and design a structure capable of fulfilling a function that has been assigned to them. The engineers of the future will be the ones who know they are successful when they are surprised by their own creations.

The paradigm of *complex, self-organizing systems* envisioned by von Neumann is stepping ahead at an accelerated pace, both in science and in technology. It is in the process of shoving away and replacing the old metaphors inherited from the cybernetic paradigm (the one whose main concept is "control"), like the representations that treat the mind or the genome as computer programs. Complexity has already become a catchword in biology.

The time has not come – and may never come – when we manufacture selfreplicating machinery that mimics the self-replication of living materials. However, we are using more and more living materials and their capacity for self-organization to mimic smart machinery or perform mechanical functions. We are manufacturing self-organization and soon we shall be able to unchain complexity, that is, create irreversible processes that would never have existed without human intervention. The height of this ambition will be reached when or if we become able to manufacture life itself – not necessarily the kind of life that emerged spontaneously on this planet one billion years ago and evolved into ever more complex forms, but organizations that have the basic properties which we attribute to life: self-replication and self-complexification.

It will then be an inevitable temptation, not to say a task or a duty, for the technologists of the future to set off processes over which they have *no control*. The myth of the sorcerer's apprentice must be updated: it is neither by error nor by terror that Man will be dispossessed of his own creations but *by design*.

#### Notes

- 1. Arendt, H. (1958). *The Human Condition* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press), p. 295.
- 2. ibid., pp. 2–3.
- 3. Kelly, K. (in progress). "Will Spiritual Robots Replace Humanity by 2100?," in *The Technium*, http://www.kk.org/thetechnium/
