---
images: []
order: 144
title: MAARTEN FRANSSEN AND PETER KROES
---

The core of technology is the design and realization – which includes manufacture, implementation and maintenance – of technical artifacts. The prototypical artifact is a single material object designed to be used by a particular person for a particular purpose. There is an important class of artifacts, in the sense of man-made constructs, that cannot be seen as a single connected material object, nor as having a single user or even a sequence of single but distinct users. Typical examples are the infrastructures that form the backbone of our societies: the air and road transportation systems, the electricity and gas networks. Such artifacts have a diffuse multitude of users, a multitude that is, moreover, heterogeneous in that the purposes for which the users participate in its use may be quite different. It is increasingly being recognized that artifactual constructs of this sort have particular properties that set them apart from other artifacts, and pose special problems to the people who are involved in designing and implementing them, which has led to their being referred to by the special term *sociotechnical systems*.

Sociotechnical systems are, first of all, systems. The notion of system, however, is extremely general. Any single-user consumer artifact is a system in that it consists of various components, where the behavior of the overall artifact results from a careful matching of the input–output relations between these components. Still, these components are all similar in being material objects for which a scientific description is available that enables engineers to investigate, predict and control their input– output behavior.

Sociotechnical systems, in contrast, are hybrid systems, consisting of, or involving, "components" or "elements" that, by the description we have available for their behavior, belong to other domains than just the domain of the material objects described by natural science. Among these components or elements we may distinguish individual people, but also corporate actors such as business companies and governmental bodies, and more abstract social entities such as institutions, and laws, regulations and other rules.

It is important to recognize that people can be involved in artifactual systems, through their relations to the material objects that are in a straightforward sense components of such systems, in two different ways. On the one hand, there are people who use the system, through their use of material components of the system, in the

way the people who drive their car to go to work use the road transportation system, and the people who connect their television set to the socket in their house use the electric-power system. On the other hand, there are people who are involved in the operation and maintenance of the system. In the case of the road transportation system they include road workers, traffic police, petrol-station personnel, and so forth; in the case of the electric-power system they include the operators of power stations, repair and maintenance workers in the field, and the personnel of the companies that sell electricity to customers. There may also be cases where it is difficult to decide to which category someone belongs. A taxi driver, for example, or an employed chauffeur, seems to participate in the traffic system just like any other car driver. However, these people do not use the road transportation system to satisfy their goal of being transported from one place to another. Presumably they participate for some purpose of their own – to earn a salary or make a profit, or to live a fulfilling life – but this purpose bears no logical relation to the function of the system they "use" for this purpose.

The contrast between these two ways people are involved in sociotechnical systems can be accentuated by considering that in their facilitating role people can in principle be replaced by – intelligent – machines. It would make no sense, however, to consider automating the users of a sociotechnical system, that is, the people who use the roads and petrol stations to drive their car to work or who use the power sockets in their home to watch television. Were these people to be replaced by machines, there would no longer be any point to the system. This shows that, whereas the intentionality of the user of a system is necessary for the conception of the system as performing a function in the first place, the intentionality of the people who are active in the operation, facilitation, maintenance and repair of the system is only an accidental property of these "system components."

Hardware components and people fulfilling certain roles do not exhaust the ingredients of sociotechnical systems, however. Institutions and the related rules and regulations are also essential, beyond the extent to which there is an institutional background to all technical artifacts. This institutional background consists partly of the rules that constitute corporate actors, such that business firms can own, buy and sell objects and be held liable in case of misconduct, and partly of the rules defining misconduct, i.e. the safety, health and environmental protection regulations to which the design, manufacture and use of all artifacts is subject. Sociotechnical systems additionally require rules defining ownership, regulating the distribution and billing of costs, regulating the mutual effects of consecutive use by different users. Although arguably a road transportation system could exist even in the absence of any traffic rules, the road transportation system as we know it functions only thanks to the existence of traffic rules and of a legal system – itself functioning largely on the basis of rules – that sees to it that these rules are maintained and effective. Similarly the electric-power system as we know it functions only given a set of rules that determine how much an individual user is charged for the share of electric power he or she took, and given a legal system that sees to it that these rules are implemented. It is only on the basis of this regulatory apparatus that individual "customers" develop the sort of trust in the system that is necessary for them to be prepared to use it.

A special place among these rules is taken by the rules that define the roles of the human "components" of a sociotechnical system. Such rules specify what a traffic

policeman or the operator of the control room of a power station is supposed to do, given the circumstances. The individual traffic policeman or control-room operator serves his or her individual purpose of earning a living best by following those roles as meticulously as possible. When these human components of the system are replaced by machines, these machines must be engineered or programmed to operate in accord with these rules; they incorporate these rules, so to speak, in the way an ordinary thermostat can be seen as incorporating the rule "Keep the room at a temperature of *x*°C." It could be argued, however, that in this way the rules lose their character as rules. A rule is a normative concept: it is not true or false but applies or does not apply, and whether or not it is actually followed does not affect whether or not it applies. Following a rule follows upon a judgment that the rule applies. The machines replacing the humans supposedly cannot judge that they are in a situation in which they ought to apply the rule they incorporate, nor can they break the rules they incorporate; that is precisely what the incorporation amounts to. The considerations that specify when a particular rule applies are themselves of the form of rules and therefore presuppose considerations when they in their turn apply and when not. If this is true, it is in principle impossible to replace all human components in a sociotechnical system by machines that incorporate the rules defining the corresponding roles. A naturalist, however, would argue that human beings themselves are just as little capable of exhaustively fulfilling these roles, and accordingly there would then be no principled limit to the automation of human roles. This issue is of interest to disciplines like safety science but also has an ethical dimension, concerning, for example, the notion of responsibility.

The previous considerations point to the particular difficulties that sociotechnical systems pose to engineering design, in particular the question of the engineer's control of the system. In the classical approach to engineering design an engineer aims to construct an artifact such that, as long as certain conditions prevail that include the conditions of the environment in which the artifact is to be used and the specific manipulations that are involved in its use, the behavior of the artifact can be predicted with certainty. This can be achieved thanks to the engineer's investigation of and subsequent knowledge of the law-like behavior of the materials and components applied in the specified circumstances and to the controlled linking of the components to each other, but also, of course, thanks to the engineer's ability to prescribe precisely to any future user the required manipulations and environmental conditions. This does not necessarily presuppose a single user; the artifact's designer could specify the coordinated manipulations of an exact number of users. If a user chooses to deviate from these prescriptions, the artifact's behavior is no longer the responsibility of the designer, although it has increasingly become a part of engineering design to limit the possibilities of the user to deviate in cases where such deviations would cause a hazard to the user or his or her environment, whereby the scope of the engineer's control of the artifact's behavior is extended even more.

In the case of sociotechnical systems, this "control paradigm" can no longer be upheld. Sociotechnical systems have an indefinite, constantly changing number of users who are generally anonymous to each other and cannot coordinate their use of the system except in limiting cases of close contact, even though they may anticipate the system's use by others and the consequences for their own use, such as traffic queues during rush hours. This difficulty of coordination is repeated at the system level of managers and operators: decisions to open or close motorway lanes and access roads, or to expand power-generating capacity, to decouple stations, or to purchase extra capacity, are equally distributed over various roles, even internationally, and therefore involve problems of coordination. Finally, control is limited by the importance of the institutional level. Legal and regulatory changes may limit or expand the freedom of operators to take measures as defined for their roles, and changes in traffic law or insurance law may cause considerable changes in the way the users of the system behave. Owing to these limitations to the control of the system, classical engineering design criteria like optimality and efficiency become very hard to operationalize. Instead criteria like flexibility and robustness seem the more important ones.

Even taking into account that sociotechnical systems evolve and are constantly redesigned, rather than designed in one stroke, an adequate conceptualization of the system is of first importance for the professionals involved in designing such systems. Here, engineering design also faces a major challenge. In contrast to traditional artifacts, where all elements are material objects related by causal laws, it is unclear how the various elements or components involved in sociotechnical systems – hardware, people in various roles, and laws, rules and regulations – must be seen as making up the system, and in particular by what relations these elements are linked. Since the behavior of people is described with intentional rather than causal concepts, and since rules are abstract rather than concrete things, these relations must cover a much wider spectrum than just the causal laws of natural science.

Part of the problem of conceptualizing sociotechnical systems is the problem of where to draw their boundaries. It is an important aspect of the character of sociotechnical systems that the scope of design includes all types of elements. Designing a sociotechnical system will therefore involve designing specific roles and tasks for people to fulfill to match the hardware components, and also rules to define and regulate these roles and tasks. The road-transport system, for example, contains coordinating devices such as traffic lights; but, for such technical devices to contribute adequately to the overall functioning of the system, laws that punish those who ignore them are essential, as are police patrols to detect such cases. Maintaining the system then includes not just checking that the lights still work, but also checking that drivers' estimates of the chance of getting caught when skipping the lights are still large enough, and that the fines are still high enough to deter them. Engineers may come up with sophisticated technical solutions for particular problems, such as special lanes for carpoolers to reduce traffic-jams; but, if the law forbids any discrimination among car drivers on public roads, the technical solution itself is ineffective, and the design should include an accompanying change of law. It depends on the circumstances whether such changes can indeed be considered during the design process – which would include the government as a party to the design – and whether the boundaries of the system should be (re)drawn accordingly. For any sociotechnical system, however, the technical, human-operational and institutional levels all contribute to its adequate functioning and must all be taken into account in its design and implementation.
