---
images: []
order: 147
title: The Evolution of IT
---

According to a broadly inclusive understanding of IT, the invention of alphabets, numerical notations and writing systems represents the earliest and most fundamental stage in the development of information technologies. This was certainly Plato's view when he notoriously complained against written records in favour of a dialectical understanding of what is eternal and immutable (*Phaedo* 275a and ff.). Writing makes possible the diachronic accumulation of information as non-biological memory. But, if writing is the first step, it is then natural to interpret the invention of printing as its completion and hence as the following major revolution in IT. The mechanization of text reproduction made the accumulated information widely available to a potentially endless number of people. After the fifteenth century, universal alphabetization – that is, the translation of availability of information into its accessibility – came to be considered, for the first time in the history of human civilization, a feasible project.

The evolution of IT from Plato to Gutenberg is therefore largely understandable as the evolution of recording technologies. Then, from Leibniz to the *Encyclopédie*(1751–80), IT was at the center of a vast process of reorganization and restructuring of huge amounts of recorded information increasing exponentially. But. when the nineteenth century came to be dominated by the telegraph (Standage 1998), and IT became associated with communication technologies, the impression was that the original function of recording technologies had been replaced by the new function of communication (Headrick 2000). It is indicative that the Cooke and Wheatstone electric "Five Needle Telegraph," patented in London in 1837, had no means of recording messages and that Morse judged this a major shortcoming. History proved him right; IT was to develop by accumulating functions, not by replacing them. The following inventions, especially cinema, radio, telephone and television, all belong to the communication era of IT. This is why they are considered mass media, i.e. media of mass communication, although they are also media of massive recording.

The third and last stage begins only in the middle of the twentieth century, with the invention of the computer (Goldstine 1972). Between 1941 (Zuse Z3, Germany) and 1948 (ENIAC, USA), IT acquired its new meaning, the one we currently associate to it, as it came to refer to any technology used to elaborate information by processing data electronically and automatically. For a few decades, IT was once again supposed to have replaced its previous function (communication) with a new one, elaboration. Shifting from analog to digital solutions, the invention of new languages and new physical supports gave the impression that the old function of recording could now be joined by the new processing capacities. Communication was no longer in view. This proved to be, once again, a mistake. By the end of the twentieth century, the evolution of the Internet, of the Worldwide Web, of email communication, of mobile phones and of other digital technologies of information exchange and dissemination had shown that IT continues to comprise and cross-fertilize all of the three functions listed above: information recording, communication and elaboration (Cyganski et al. 2001).
