---
images: []
order: 149
title: IT in the Information Society
---

What we call "the information society" has been brought about by the fastest-growing technology in history. No previous generation has ever been exposed to such an extraordinary acceleration of technological power and corresponding social changes. Total pervasiveness and high power have raised IT to the status of the characteristic technology of our time, both rhetorically and iconographically. No wonder that the computer, the quintessential IT product, has become a symbol of the new millennium, playing a cultural role comparable to that of mills in the Middle Ages, mechanical clocks in the seventeenth century, and the loom or the steam engine in the age of the industrial revolution (Ifrah 2001). The computer as the information machine is a defining technology.

The most developed post-industrial societies now literally live by information, and IT is what keeps them constantly oxygenated. Information has matured into an asset of growing value, with marketable quantities and prices. It is the new digital gold and represents one of the most valuable resources. Such modifications in the growth, the fruition and the management of information resources and services concern four main IT sectors: computation, automatic control, modeling, and information management. This sequence follows a conceptual order and only partially overlaps through time.

"Computation" seems to be a sufficiently intuitive concept, but as soon as one tries to provide a clear and fully satisfactory definition of it one immediately realizes how difficult the task is. According to different perspectives, computation may be described as a logical or physical process of generation of final states (outputs) from initial states (inputs), based on:

- (1) rule-governed state-transitions, or
- (2) discrete or digital rule-governed state-transitions, or
- (3) a series of rule-governed state-transitions for which the rule can be altered, or
- (4) rule-governed state-transitions between interpretable states.

There are some difficulties with these definitions. (1) is too loose, for it also applies to devices such as printers and washing machines, physical systems that we do not include in the class of computational systems or IT; (2) is perhaps too strict, for it excludes forms of analog computation, which one may wish to include in the definition of IT; (3) is either vague or too strict, for there are computational systems, like pocket calculators, with embedded rules (non-programmable algorithms); (4) seems to be the most satisfactory, as it makes the interpretable representation of a state (i.e. information) a necessary condition for computation.

Although computation has remained a major area of application, it would be shortsighted to think that the impact of the technological innovations brought about by the diffusion of IT has been limited just to straightforward numerical problems, and hence to important but quite specific sectors of mathematical applications. For not only have computers helped us to read some of the most complex chapters in the "mathematical book of nature"; they also have put us in a position to control a large variety of physical and bureaucratic processes automatically (office automation and electronic data processing). Today, the complex functioning of an increasing number of manufacturing and administrative operations requires the constant intervention of microprocessors and other IT devices. Following on from the process of mechanization, IT has caused a second industrial revolution through the implementation of massive automation. As industry has moved from a low-technology, unspecialized and labor-intensive stage to a highly mechanized, automated (electronics), AT-intensive (advanced technology) and more specialized stage, it has become extensively information-based and hence more and more IT-dependent.

The mathematical description and the digital control of the physical environment have provided the solid premises for its potential replacement by mathematical models (systems of differential equations) in scientific computing and virtual reality environments. Digital computing has become crucial whenever it is necessary to simulate real-life properties and forecast the behavior of objects placed in contexts that are either not reproducible in laboratory situations or simply not testable at all, whether for safety reasons, for example, or because of the high cost of building and testing physical prototypes, or because we need non-invasive and non-destructive techniques of analysis, as in medical contexts. Indeed, every area of human knowledge whose models and entities – whether real or theoretical no longer matters – can be translated into the digital language of bits is, and will inevitably be more and more dependent upon, IT capacity to let us perceive and handle the objects under investigation, as if they were everyday things, pieces on a chess board that can be automatically moved, rotated, mirrored, scaled, magnified, modified, combined and subjected to the most diverse transformations and tests (Baeyer 2003).

The IT-based description and control of the physical environment, together with the digital construction of a synthetic world, is, finally, intertwined with a fourth area of application, represented by the transformation of the encyclopedic macrocosm of data, information, ideas, knowledge, beliefs, codified experiences, memories, images, artistic interpretations and other mental creations into a global *infosphere* (Floridi 2004). The infosphere is the whole system of services and documents, encoded in any semiotic and physical media, whose contents include any sort of data, information and knowledge, with no limitations either in size, typology or logical structure, and hence ranging from alphanumeric texts (i.e. texts including letters, numbers and diacritic symbols) and multimedia products to statistical data, from films and hypertexts to whole text-banks and collections of pictures, from mathematical formulae to sounds and videoclips. As regards the infosphere, the symbolic-computational power of IT tools is employed for ends that go beyond the solution of complex numerical problems, the control of a mechanical world or the creation of virtual models. IT provides the new means to generate, manufacture and control the flow of digital data and information (which is also being generated, in increasingly huge quantities, by the three areas of application just mentioned) thus managing its life cycle.

### Conclusion

Information is the sap of contemporary societies, and IT provides the essential tool for its generation, recording, flow, management and usage. The corruption, wanton

destruction, illegal or unethical use of information may easily undermine the basic processes on which the life of individuals and their complex societies depends (Brown and Duguid 2002). In light of their importance, the whole life cycle of information – from collection or generation through storage and manipulation to usage and possible erasure – is often protected, at different stages, by legal systems in various ways and in many different contexts. Examples include copyright and ownership legislation, patent systems, privacy protection laws, fair use agreements, regulations about availability and accessibility of sensitive data, and so forth. The more societies develop into information-based societies, the more concerned and careful they need to become about their very foundation. Unsurprisingly, in recent years ethical and political concerns about the correct and fair usage of IT have begun to address the challenging ethical issues raised by the new data-based environment in which advanced societies grow (Floridi 2007).

#### References and Further Reading

- Baeyer, H. C. van (2003). *Information: The New Language of Science* (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson). Brown, J. S. and Duguid, P. (2002). *The Social Life of Information* (Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press). Paperback edition of the 2000 hardback edition, includes some corrections and revisions.
- Cyganski, D., Orr, J. A. and Vaz, R. F. (2001). *Information Technology: Inside and Outside* (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall).
- Floridi, L. (1999). *Philosophy and Computing: An Introduction* (London/New York: Routledge). Reprinted as electronic book (London: Routledge, 2001). Greek translation forthcoming.
- Floridi, L. (2004). "Information," in *The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Computing and Information*, ed. L. Floridi (Oxford/New York: Blackwell), pp. 40–61.
- Floridi, L. (2007). "Information Ethics: Its Nature and Scope," in J. van der Hoven and J. Weckert (eds), *Moral Philosophy and Information Technology* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
- Goldstine, H. H. (1972). *The Computer from Pascal to Von Neumann* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press). Reprinted 2001.
- Headrick, D. R. (2000). *When Information Came of Age : Technologies of Knowledge in the Age of Reason and Revolution, 1700–1850* (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
- Ifrah, G. (2001). *The Universal History of Computing: From the Abacus to the Quantum Computer* (New York: John Wiley).
- Standage, T. (1998). *The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and the Nineteenth Century's Online Pioneers* (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson).
