---
images: []
order: 154
title: MARY TILES
---

The "Inconvenient Truth"1 we face in the twenty-first century is that our reliance on fossil fuel technologies for the previous two centuries has had an impact on our global environment. Combustion of fossil fuels has increased the level of carbon dioxide in the earth's atmosphere to the point at which the occurrence of global warming has had to be acknowledged even by determined skeptics in the White House. The publicity given to this issue, and the politicization of the science surrounding it, means that it has come to frame many discussions of the relationships between technology and the environment. In the mid-twentieth century, during the period of the Cold War, the hazards of nuclear technology and of the widespread use of insecticides (such as DDT) in agriculture occupied similar roles. In the nineteenth century it was the transformation and degradation of landscapes by steam-powered industrial technology, as reflected in, for example, the work of William Blake ("England's dark satanic mills"), that framed the context of debate.

These are the contexts of environmental politics, of the clash of values between enthusiasts viewing technological development as an essential indicator of human progress and detractors who have seen technology as a vehicle of domination over both the natural environment and large sectors of humanity. When the terms "technology" and "environment" are juxtaposed in such contexts there is a tendency to assume that the discussion to follow will be framed in terms of the divide between Man and Nature. Technology is seen as the material expression of Man's ambition to dominate Nature, with the subjugated natural environment the victim of its detrimental impacts.

Here, in brief, we see the ideological load borne by juxtaposition of the terms "technology" and "environment" and the near-impossibility of entering into any discussion of their relationships from an ideologically neutral standpoint. Many environmentalist critiques of technology have shared with their tacitly or explicitly faith-based opponents an acceptance of the Man–Nature divide. Questions are then framed as questions of environmental ethics and as disputes over the fundamental locus of moral values.2 This ideological/political burden of "The Environment," particularly in the United States, creates a chasm across which it is difficult to conduct a policy dialogue, let alone construct policy bridges in response to the challenges potentially presented by a changing climate. As in most such standoffs, the opposed positions rest on a shared assumption, in this case that humans and their environments, or Man and The

Environment, are independently constituted and stand in an external relationship; absolute values can have a basis on one or the other, but not on both.

Recognizing that such deep ideological differences are unlikely to be resolved either by philosophical debate between the opposed positions or by political or moral evangelism, it would seem that it is past time to challenge the idea that there is any such thing as The Environment standing in an external relation to humans, their histories and their technologies. In other words, it is time to become reacquainted with human *environments* and our dependencies on them as well as with the extent to which they are *human* environments, formed over the course of a history of human habitation. An examination of the role of technology in creating environments, through its function as an intermediary that creates human–natural hybrids, is one route to such re-acquaintance. An environment is simply a surrounding, a context, a milieu, hardly anything with enough stability or definition to become an object of scientific investigation or of philosophical or political concern. I shall begin by illustrating the manner in which technologies play a constitutive role in relation to many of our environments. On this basis I shall propose that there is a need to extend the conception of an ecosystem and of ecology to industrial, technological and social ecosystems and ecologies.

Because ecology is very unlike sciences such as physics and chemistry, a policy debate informed by an extended ecological perspective could be expected to view policy objectives in a rather different way than would be the case were the debate informed by the perspective of the more traditional sciences.

First, however, it is worth briefly mentioning two contexts that lend credence to and serve to reinforce use of the technology–environment opposition as a surrogate for the Man–Nature opposition and its construal of this as an external relation. The first is that of mining and manufacturing, and the second is that of the military–industrial model of technological development.

Mining and manufacturing technologies are those that have most frequently been portrayed as threats to the environment because they have most dramatically illustrated the capacity of human technologies to create environments that are hostile to many life-forms, human included. Their development is also intimately intertwined with the development of energy and transport technologies. Mining is a paradigm example of an activity that is locally unsustainable, exploitative and hugely disruptive of the natural and social environments in which it begins to operate. Mineral deposits occur in limited quantities that will sooner or later be exhausted and the extraction of which becomes increasingly uneconomic. Extraction, whether open-face or by tunneling, wreaks dramatic physical changes on the landscape. Communities of miners and their associated equipment move into regions that may have been sparsely populated and largely agricultural or pastoral. Roads or waterways have to be built to supply the mines and to transport materials to and from them.3 The extraction of metals from mineral ores requires mechanical energy for crushing, and heat for smelting; and the by-products, frequently toxic, migrate into the surroundings, possibly continuing for many years to leach out of large spoil heaps that remain long after a mine's closure. Early mines were severely limited by the available technology for pumping water out of mine shafts. This was the context driving the development of the use of steam for power, with the large beam engines used first for pumping out water, and then to haul material and men up and down shafts whose increased depth was now possible, then to drive steam hammers

for crushing and steam engines for hauling carts horizontally along rails. The synergistic development of coal-mining and the burning of coal to power steam engines was the spur to the industrial revolution that transformed the rural countryside of central England into the Black Country, wreathed in smoke and soot that clung to buildings and the inside of people's lungs – these were the dark satanic mills. The transformation in manufacturing capacity associated both with improved transportation and with a seemingly inexhaustible supply of energy transformed the economy and society. It laid the foundations of the environment – physical, social economic and political – in which we now live, even though the era of steam has passed, those mills are now silent, the mines are mostly closed and their mining communities dispersed. It began our dependence on the intensive use of fossil fuel in quantities the global impact of which we have only belatedly come to recognize. It gave rise to a chemical industry that has transformed our lived environment in ways too numerous to mention, but also in ways that we are far from understanding. It has created and continues to create local environments surrounding mines, oil-drilling operations, refineries and chemical plants that are toxic to most life forms. So it is natural, if this is our image of technology, to put it in opposition to Nature since one of the side-effects of its operations has been to create wastelands devoid of anything much in the way of organic life.

A different kind of oppositional relationship is revealed in the context of the military– industrial development of technology. This has been equally important in shaping conceptions of the technology–environment relationship, and is a relationship that has enormous significance for the forging of the science–technology relation. As Serres (1982) notes (crediting Lucretius with a similar insight), military applications have frequently been the spur driving the use of science in technological development. In contrast the history of mining technology, including the early development of the steam engine, was not theory-driven but was craft- and trade-based. The development of military capacity, whether defensive or offensive, was perceived by those in power as a necessary instrument for their continued survival and/or hold on power; and, because possession of technological devices not available to opponents was believed to confer a military advantage, there is an internal dynamic favoring investment in innovation. The fact that military applications have played such a role in technological development is of no minor significance for the manner in which the environment has been impacted by the development of technology or for the way in which the technology– environment relation has been conceptualized.

Whether in the remains of ancient China or in those of the ancient Roman Empire, one can see evidence of the impact of the military impetus toward regimentation, imposed for the sake of efficient and predictable operation, on the technologies used and on the built infrastructure required for their use. Armies need standardized equipment with standardized parts that can be on hand in any location. Army engineers developed standardized methods for the construction of structures such as roads or fortifications, for carriages and ships, for armor and weaponry, methods and specifications developed ahead of time with people trained to deploy them in any required location. Stretches of road used by the Romans to move their troops and supplies rapidly across the outposts of their empire can still be identified by their straightness and by their lack of concern for local topographical or land-holding patterns. Military engineers used geometry to assist in the design of fort walls and ramparts as defenses against anticipated

forms of attack (themselves conditioned by available technology) and replicated them across the territory to be defended.

Particularly for large imperial powers, military efficiency and effectiveness is linked to the requirements of bureaucratic techniques of administration, techniques that require standardization in modes of operation allowing for centralized design and planning and allowing personnel and equipment to be moved from one location to another without significant retraining or redesign. This has two effects. It allows design to become a theoretical process, carried out according to general principles, and separated from actual construction; and it requires that local environmental variations be made irrelevant. They can be made irrelevant either by insulating devices to be used from external impacts that might affect their designated function (the design of a ship's chronometer – a mechanical timepiece designed to keep accurate time through the pitching and rolling of a ship and through the wide variations in temperature that might be experienced on a long sea voyage4 is one instance where there is documentation of the long sequence of efforts explicitly undertaken to address this challenge) or by altering the local environment to conform to conditions under which the device functions well (build roads for carriages, deforest and flatten areas around forts5 ) or some combination of both.6 The aim is to create an environment favorable to forward planning that relies on being able to predict the degree to which actions will have their desired effects. Where there is uniformity there is also much more predictability; but that uniformity has to be created by eradicating or externalizing relevant variations. The close interconnections, both historically and in contemporary society, between the military drive for technological innovation and large private corporations (the bureaucracies of the military–industrial complex7 ) have ensured that it is this conception of technology, with its deliberately designed insensitivity to environmental variations and to its own environmental impacts that has been another lens focusing attention on the relation between technology and environment as one of opposed and competing interests and values. This has left in the shadows, and relatively invisible until recently, the factors ignored when concentrating attention in this way.

One of the areas to have exposed weaknesses in the approach that assumes that local environmental variations can either be ignored or eliminated is that of the design and use of agricultural technologies under the move to an "industrial" agriculture. It has frequently been pointed out that one of the most significant shifts in the way humans sought to secure their basic needs was when they made the transition from being nomadic hunter-gathering groups to becoming place-based agricultural societies. It has been through the development of agriculture and technologies to support it that humans traditionally have most altered and created the environments in which they live. Agricultural technology made possible the rise of cities, with their large urban populations and built environments. These in turn needed to be defended both against other groups of humans and against the forces of nature; they required extraction of material sources for their construction and for the manufacture of the tools and artifacts that became the trappings of "civilization" – the goods that can be accumulated in settled dwelling places.

Agriculture is undoubtedly the locus of the most immediate and most necessary interaction between humans and their physical/biological environment. Where the story of the rise of agriculture was once told as part of the long epic of human progress, some

more recent tellings have been more ambivalent.8 They have documented the decline in human health as a result of increased dependence on grain in the diet. They have also emphasized that opting for agriculture and a more settled existence marked an irreversible choice for a society. Increased food availability leads to population levels that cannot be supported without agriculture; population pressure acts to spur technological innovation and motivates the drive to bring more land under cultivation, thus changing the face of ever wider swathes of the landscape. This is a technological treadmill from which there is no voluntary release.

Currently there are concerns that, although we have used new technologies to increase global agricultural yields to levels once thought unattainable, and have thus, so far, roughly kept pace with population increases (although it has to be acknowledged that distribution is far from equitable), this has been done on an unsustainable basis. The massive increases in production since the Second World War have been the result, first, of the increased use of fertilizers resulting from chemical production, ultimately dependent on oil. This technological shift allowed grain production to expand without the need of inputs of manure from animal husbandry and allowed elimination of elaborate crop rotations and periods of fallow. However, this amounts to turning fossil fuel (oil) into grain. As fears mount about the limits of oil production having been reached, and because of all the other demands on oil, some worry that the current configuration of our large agricultural systems will not remain viable.9 The second important stimulant to agricultural production, spurred by the availability of nitrogen fertilizers was the so-called "green revolution" – the development of hybridized grain crops that can take up more nitrogen and grow more grain rather than more leaf and stalk. Seeds from hybrids cannot be saved for replanting because they will not reproduce the original hybrid; and, in any case, the new varieties have, for the most part, been patented by large corporations. Widespread use of a limited number of varieties results in mono-cropping, thus eliminating local genetic variation, and assumes that such genetic variation is irrelevant to crop success in different locations or even in a single location from year to year.

These crops also required more water if they were to produce consistently higher yields. In many parts of the world the acreage of land under irrigation was dramatically increased. In some cases this has been the result of dam-building projects, but in others the same prospecting and drilling technologies that served the oil industry were used to locate and tap underground aquifers. Some of these aquifers contained "fossil" water (water trapped many years ago and receiving no significant current replacement) while others are replenished much more slowly than the current rate of pumping. Technology has allowed us to exploit these resources, but further technological innovation seems the only possible route to maintaining current levels of agricultural production as aquifers and rivers begin to run dry. This is the sense in which embarking on the agricultural path has put human beings on a technological treadmill. And that treadmill has caused us to (re)shape, wittingly and unwittingly, vast regions of the land surface of the globe.

Water-control technologies have been hugely important for the expansion of cultivated land and the provision of sufficient food surpluses for the emergence of nonagricultural sectors of human activity. Water is also important for human consumption, health and hygiene. On the other hand, it poses a threat to human life when there

is too little, when there is an overabundance and when it is contaminated with disease-causing organisms or toxic chemicals. The need and ability to control water provides one of the most striking examples of the way in which physical environment prompts development of certain kinds of technologies that then shape and constrain the societies that come to depend on them. The ancient "hydraulic" civilizations of India, the Middle East, South America, China and Bali provide examples.10 Although the technical details of hydrological challenges and the technologies available to deal with them are location, time and region specific, there are common features of dependence on water management. As water-control technologies are put in place in the service of agriculture, continued production of food depends on continued water control, and this in turn can impose very high maintenance burdens. On continental land-masses, as opposed to relatively small islands, river networks extend over many miles and usually through several countries. Water projects undertaken upstream will almost certainly impact those further downstream.11 The development of modern engineering technologies that make possible the construction of ever bigger dams has introduced the potential for major political conflict as larger proportions of a river's flow can be diverted for irrigation or other uses well before it reaches the sea.12

Water can be a problem when there is too much as well as when there is too little. Technologies have been developed and deployed to prevent rivers causing damage by bursting their banks and flooding agricultural land or towns, villages or cities, and to prevent the sea encroaching and causing similar damage. Just as in regions of water shortage those with access have sought to retain water for their own use without consideration of the downstream consequences, similarly in regions subject to flooding the tendency has been to find ways to hasten the water's flow away, passing it on as quickly as possible to lower reaches. Rarely was thought given to the impact of either approach on coastal ecosystems when rivers reach the sea. Some rivers no longer do so; in other cases they do so but without depositing the burden of silt that maintained and fertilized delta regions,13; in yet others they are carrying silt out into ecosystems, such as coral reefs, that will be disrupted by its presence. All of this is teaching us that, when water is regarded as a commodity to be shifted around at will, our environments are transformed in ways we may or may not have intended or foreseen. At a time when fresh water is projected to become an increasingly scarce commodity in many regions, and sea water, with a predicted rise in sea levels, poses a greater threat to many inhabitants of coastal regions, it is perhaps particularly important to learn from the impacts of past technologies of water management and to think in a more integrated way about the role of water in constraining the ways in which we can live and about the role of water systems in shaping our environments on a number of scales (local to global), below ground as well as above.14

Similarly there is a need to think beyond agriculture and its technologies to the larger systems in which they are embedded. For example, the widespread use of seedbreeding technology, and now genetic modification, was accompanied by the rise of large seed companies and a transformation of agriculture favoring large farms over small holdings facilitated by the development of farm machinery, in turn made possible by the internal combustion engine.

The displacement of human energy in agriculture made possible by reliance on oilbased technologies has changed our societies and our environments in another way. There are now sparsely populated agricultural landscapes, ever growing cities, suburban sprawl and unplanned slums created by the movement of people off the land.

Technology has displaced people – has moved them from environments in which they have a relatively close relationship to the land and to other life forms to another, much more obviously man-made environment, one where people, their activities and the byproducts of those activities dominate. Of course, none of this separation of population concentrations from their sources of food would be possible without transportation networks, trade agreements, refrigeration and food-processing technologies. This illustrates the sense in which technologies do not stand alone but themselves exist and thrive or face extinction depending on other environmental (technological, natural, social) conditions. Large farm machinery is of little use in cultivating small patches of land clinging to hillsides or nestling in valley bottoms. US pork production can be concentrated in the huge hog farms of the Carolinas only if there are ways to bring that meat to distant consumer markets and only if regulatory structures permit the widespread use of antibiotics in farm animals and the accumulation of manure in open lagoons (in a manner that would not be permitted for human waste). The rise in meat consumption worldwide, made possible by industrial-scale livestock operations, is in turn having an impact on the atmosphere and thus on climate.15 Much of the history of technology has been written as a history of technological devices (the plow, the combine harvester, the steam engine . . . ). Attention has also been given to the potential of such devices for changing human environments (living and working conditions) as well as "natural" environments (landscapes, wildlife and their habitats, water, air . . . ). But, as I hope the all too brief discussion above has indicated, if we are concerned about the interactions between technological devices and environments, it is equally important not only to think about the actual and potential effects of deployment and use of the devices, but also to look at the economic conditions, processes, labor and materials required for their manufacture and successful use as well as the effects of disposal at the end of their useful life. In other words, we need to borrow techniques and concepts from ecology to think in terms of industrial or technological ecology16 that can focus on the webs of interdependence between different technologies and the ways in which they form environments for each other as well as for human and other living organisms.

The idea of ecology as a potential science arises in the context of Darwin's theory of evolution. It was first mooted and labeled by Haeckel in 1866 (seven years after the appearance of *The Origin of Species*). Three years later he explained it in the following terms:

By ecology we mean the body of knowledge concerning the economy of nature – the investigation of the total relations of the animal both to its organic and to its inorganic environment; including, above all, its friendly and inimical relations with those animals and plants with which it comes directly or indirectly into contact – in a word, ecology is the study of all those complex interrelations referred to by Darwin as the conditions of the struggle for existence.

(quoted in Cooper 2003: 4–5)

At the time no such study existed, in part because the need to take environments into account does not, on its own, indicate how they can become "objects" of scientific

investigation and knowledge.17 They have to be acknowledged as complex, but also treated as quasi-organic wholes, wholes whose characteristics cannot be understood as any simple aggregation of properties of the parts since the whole motivation from evolutionary biology is to attempt to understand the *interactive* relations between a given part – the life form in focus – and the remainder, the environment that constitutes its dynamic backdrop. Already in Haeckel's "definition" we can see the potential problem for the construction of a unitary discipline. He refers to both organic and inorganic environments. The problem here is that the biological study of organisms in communities and the applied physics and chemistry used to study ecosystems bring fundamentally different categories and methods to bear. For example, where one deals in the dynamics and statistics of populations the other looks at flows of energy and materials. So there is considerable heterogeneity within ecology as it has come to be practiced. None the less there are some important reorientations in the way to think about human environments that can emerge from reframing the discussion by starting from an evolutionary perspective.

The evidence brought forward in favor of theories of the evolution of the human species, whether Darwinian or Lamarckian, crucially includes the fossil record, and interpretation of that record is part of the development of geological accounts of the history of planet Earth.18 This story of our origins is inseparable from the history of the planet, the place that "gave birth" to humans as to all other living creatures that now and in the past have populated it. But the history of that planet, the character of its sedimentary rocks, its coal and oil deposits, etc., is equally inseparable from the story of the life forms evolving on it. If we believe Darwin's version of our origins, we must recognize ourselves as products of selection pressures, exerted by the environments of our ancestors, on the variations thrown up by random genetic mutation. This perspective starts from a view of life as a dynamic process in which each living organism interacts with and thereby affects, to a lesser or greater extent, its surroundings, and those surroundings include all other living organisms. The cut between organism and environment is determined by the focus of attention; it does not rest on any metaphysical divide between Man and the rest of Creation. In order to understand how or why creatures have evolved as they have, attention must be paid to the physical and biological characteristics of the environments with which they had to contend in order to survive; and, in turn, those environments have to be recognized as themselves changing partly in response to their living inhabitants and as a result of the chemical and physical processes set in train by deposition and decomposition of their leavings.

Entering environmental discussions via the biological nature of human existence is thus one way of revealing the stake that all humans, in common with other living organisms, have in their environments. Through their reproductive potential, living organisms, even very small ones, have collectively the potential to affect the earth's ecosystems in significant ways if they exist in sufficient numbers.19 From the point of view of any living being, its surroundings take on a value-laden significance – they may be conditions conducive to the flourishing of that life form, conditions that threaten its continued existence or somewhere on a gradient in between.20 If one were to pursue this discussion further, it would be necessary to distinguish between individual and species. An individual's continued existence may be threatened or enhanced by others of its own kind. The existence of a whole species may be threatened or enhanced by environmental

changes – loss or extension of habitat, invasion by competitor species or other organisms. The evolution of "higher" organisms has resulted in a complex tangle of interdependencies between life forms.

Humans, however, have needs beyond those related to their continued biological existence and reproduction. Humans in societies have formed conceptions of their own nature, and of what constitutes human well-being and flourishing, and through the vehicles of religion, philosophy, politics and law in a wide variety of combinations have developed cultural and commercial structures that allow at least some fractions of society to live a life that they themselves conceive to be conducive to their wellbeing (in their own interests). Humans deploy their cognitive capacities to evaluate the situations in which they find themselves as threatening or as conducive to flourishing and have, over thousands of years developed, forgotten about and redeveloped ways of trying to protect themselves from threats and provide themselves with conditions under which they can thrive, but they have not always agreed about what constitutes human flourishing or about the role of technology in contributing to or detracting from it.

Given that conceptions of human flourishing typically extend beyond mere biological well-being, the situations being evaluated are, for the most part, not evaluated as purely natural situations; they are already hybrid21 natural–social–man-made situations. Moreover, given the limited nature of our knowledge at any given time, we do not always correctly evaluate situations or conditions, nor in our attempts to change our surroundings in ways that suit us are we fully aware of the possibly detrimental side-effects or long-term consequences of our actions. All of this is as true for ancient societies and civilizations as for modern ones. A vast panoply of technologies has been developed by human beings in their pursuit of the "good" life, whether for themselves or for the larger human community with which they identify (clan, village, city, nation, religious sect, or whatever).

Environments circumscribe the range of possible human actions, and our relationship to them is interactive; we shape and are shaped by them. The impacts of past human actions contribute to the rural (more "natural") as well as the urban (more man-made) environments of subsequent generations (the Norfolk Broads, old canal networks, ruined castles, the hedgerow or drystone-wall enclosure of fields, town squares, government buildings and institutions, paper money and banking systems . . . ).22 Once our sights are turned in this direction, it becomes natural to pay attention to technologies in the form of large infrastructure networks (irrigation systems, power grids, sewer systems, the Internet, roads . . . ) that become inseparably woven into the environment that frames our existence and will leave their mark on the environments of future generations, whether or not they are sustained to serve their original purposes. These networks are essential to manufacturing and trade, and to the continued utility of many technological devices. (How useful is an automobile without a supply of gasoline and a road to run on, or a refrigerator without a supply of electricity?) Once installed, these networks cease to be the focus of attention and are taken for granted until disrupted; we tend to forget that such systems are not self-sustaining and that the burden of maintaining them can be so high as to render the whole system vulnerable to collapse in the medium to long term.23 The variety and global extent of such infrastructure networks is what perhaps most strikingly marks our current situation. At an accelerated

pace, we are continuing to lay down webs of wires, pipes, sewers, roads, railways, and filling the airways with flight paths and communication channels all of which need to be maintained in order to sustain lifestyles as we know them and whose contributions to the environment that supports those lifestyles is largely invisible to and certainly incompletely known and understood by most of us. These infrastructure networks are the life-support systems creating environments favorable to the effective functioning of many of our technological devices; it takes energy and money and labor to maintain them. To the extent that our day-to-day existence is mediated by and dependent on the devices that depend on such networks, infrastructure networks have become factors in the human "struggle for existence." Thus they need to be included in any accounting of the ecosystems that together make up our human environments.

But, if there was a problem integrating the languages, methods and models of organic and inorganic perspective on ecosystems, inclusion of multiple technological, economic and cultural networks will only exacerbate the problem. Yet it does serve to highlight where our problem lies – in figuring out how to bring the perspectives and skills of the various scientific and technical disciplines to bear on environmental problems – and to underscore the point that the role of science cannot be expected to be that of supporting the traditional conception of problem-solving through instrumental reasoning, where science provides predictions of the consequences of actions. It was the realization that predictability and control could be secured by creating uniformity and externalizing natural environmental variations that set us down the path of creating environments for technological devices. To avoid being locked in by our own infrastructure dependencies and their associated maintenance costs would require moving back in the direction of place-based technological solutions, using locally available materials where possible, with devices designed either to be relatively impervious to environmental variation or pervious by design – designed to be able to take advantage of features specific to a local environment.24

Global warming is a statistical phenomenon since the globe does not have a temperature. Each locality will be affected differently. The rise in concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide affects all regions, but human actions generating such emissions (and those of other greenhouse gases) are concentrated in localities and do not occur uniformly around the globe. Globalization has meant that for some purposes there is no distinction between global and local. The challenge is how to retain some of the benefits of global interconnectedness while weaning ourselves off dependence on those connections the maintenance of which is both economically and environmentally the most burdensome. Globally the strategy would be to give serious consideration to variations in local conditions in our effort to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions and to create more sustainable human environments.

#### Notes

- 1. The term is borrowed from the title of Al Gore's documentary film on climate change, released in 2006.
- 2. See Latour (2004), Whiteside (2002) and Norton (2005) for more detailed and nuanced elaboration of this point.

- 3. Such enduring marks of past mining operations can be seen for example in Cornwall, Cumbria and South Wales in the UK or in Colorado in the US. Africa provides many examples of the devastation and disruption caused by ongoing mining and oil-extraction operations.
- 4. See, for example, John Harrison's various painstaking efforts to achieve this as narrated in Sobel (1995).
- 5. See, for example, Ferguson (1992).
- 6. As Latour (1988) notes (p. 90), these are the conditions on which science is able to get out of the laboratory and into application. The application of general principles often requires creation of a suitably controlled environment.
- 7. Walt Disney and Ray Krock, the founder of McDonald's, both transferred their experience of military organization and regimentation to the world of private business. Multinational corporations can now relocate and replicate manufacturing plants around the world frequently ignoring not only the natural environment but also the local social impacts as on the border between the US and Mexico.
- 8. See, for example, Diamond (1999): "Archaeologists have demonstrated that the first farmers in many areas were smaller and less well nourished, suffered more serious diseases, and died on the average at a younger age than the hunter-gatherers they replaced. If those first farmers could have foreseen the consequences of adopting food production, they might not have opted to do so" (p. 105).
- 9. See, for example, Kunstler (2005), pp. 157–66.
- 10. See, for example, Elvin (2004), Pearce (2006) and Lansing (1991).
- 11. As Elvin (2004) comments, "Water control systems are where society and economy meet the environment in a relationship that is more often than not adversarial" (p. 115). Moreover he notes that the different needs for water, such as irrigation, transport, power and drinking, have often come into competition with one another. Elvin gives two examples to "suggest the complexities of hydraulic histories and show how Chinese hydraulic engineering both changed its environment and was, in turn, constrained by it, and even – sometimes – broken by it" (p. 120). He documents the huge amounts of money, labor, materials and administrative skill required to build and then maintain a water control system. He also illustrates the way in which a society can become locked into maintenance – even at very high cost – of such a system because the costs of not doing so would be socially and economically disruptive.
- 12. One striking example is the diversion of water for irrigating cotton grown in the Aral Sea basin. The result has been that the Sea has shrunk to about 10 percent of its former size (800 m acre-feet of water). See Pearce (2006), ch. 23.
- 13. As in the case of the Mississippi delta, which used to give some protection against storm surges to New Orleans.
- 14. Pearce (2006) is an example of a broad, systematic examination of water issues.
- 15. Steinfeld et al. (2006). The livestock sector accounts for 18 percent of anthropogenic global greenhouse gas emissions measured in CO2 equivalent.
- 16. This term is borrowed from Rosen (2003); she explains: "Biologists examining natural ecosystems observe that in nature living organisms are knit together with one another and with the natural world, drawing nourishment from the bodies and wastes of other organisms as well as from the water and minerals in the soil and the energy produced by the sun. So it is for industrial ecologists. They see that business is also woven into the natural world. Business enterprises feed on natural resources found in the earth, or energy ultimately derived from the sun, wind or geological forces deep within the earth, and on the manufactured inputs of their industrial supply chains. They return their wastes to the earth the seas, and the atmosphere" (p. 320). I would want to add that business is

- also thoroughly woven into the human world and that its inputs also include human labor, management and economic capital.
- 17. As that time this was a case of what Canguilhem (1988) would call a scientific ideology: a scientific ideology comes to an end when the place that it occupied in the encyclopedia of knowledge is taken over by a discipline that operationally demonstrates the validity of its claims to scientific status, its "norms of scientificity" (p. 33). A scientific ideology is an explanatory system that strays beyond its own borrowed norms of scientificity and precedes the establishment of a science (p. 38).
- 18. See, for example, Gillispie (1951).
- 19. For example, termites exist in sufficient numbers to contribute 11 percent of the annual emission of methane from natural sources, about 20 Tg/yr. www.epa.gov/methane.
- 20. See Canguilhem (1985), p. 154.
- 21. This term is borrowed from Latour (1993).
- 22. Cronon (1983) importantly points out that "human groups often have significantly *unstable* interactions with their environments. . . . An ecological history begins by assuming a dynamic and changing relationship between environment and culture, one as apt to produce contradictions as continuities. Moreover, it assumes that the interactions of the two are dialectical. Environment may initially shape the range of choices available to a people at a given moment, but then culture reshapes the environment in response to those choices" (p. 13).
- 23. An example of such a collapse is one of the factors Davis (2001), pp. 309–10, cites for the severity of the famines in India and China in the nineteenth century. Lack of financial support for maintenance of irrigation systems led to what he calls an irrigation deficit leaving agricultural production highly vulnerable to ENSO cycles.
- 24. For example the British Soil Association recently proposed that food that has been transported by air-freight should not in future be certified as organic. This is part of a campaign to reduce the distance between producers and consumers of food and thus the amount of fossil fuel required to get food from one to the other.

#### References and Further Reading

Canguilhem, G. (1985). *La connaissance de la vie* (Paris: J. Vrin).

Canguilhem, G. (1988). *Ideology and Rationality in the History of the Life Sciences*, trans. A. Goldhammer (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press). Originally published as *Idéologie et retionalité dans l'histoire des sciences de la vie: Nouvelles etudes d'histoire et de philosophie des sciences* (Paris: J. Vrin, 1977).

Cooper, G. J. (2003). *The Science of the Struggle for Existence: On the Foundations of Ecology* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Cronon, W. (1983). *Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists and the Ecology of New England* (New York: Hill & Wang).

Davis, M. (2001). *Late Victorian Holocausts: El Niño Famines and the Making of the Third World* (London/New York: Verso).

Diamond, J. (1999). *Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies* (New York: Norton).

Elvin, M. (2004). *The Retreat of the Elephants: An Environmental History of China* (New Haven, Conn./London: Yale University Press).

Ferguson, E. S. (1992). *Engineering and the Mind's Eye* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

Gillispie, C. C. (1951). *Genesis and Geology: The Impact of Scientific Discoveries upon Religious Beliefs in the Decades before Darwin* (New York: Harper Torchbooks).

- Kunstler, J. H. (2005). *The Long Emergency: Surviving the End of Oil, Climate Change, and Other Converging Catastrophes of the Twenty-first Century* (New York: Grove Press).
- Lansing, J. S. (1991). *Priests and Programmers: Technologies of Power in the Engineered Landscape of Bali* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).
- Latour, B. (1988). *The Pasteurization of France*, trans. A. Sheridan and J. Law (Cambridge, Mass./ London: Harvard University Press). Originally published as *Les Microbes: guerre et paix suivi de ireductions* (Paris: Editions A. M. Métailié, 1984).
- Latour, B. (1993). *We Have Never Been Modern*, trans. C. Porter (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press). Originally published as *Nous n'avons jamais été modernes: Essais d'anthropologie symmétrique* (Paris: La Découverte, 1991).
- Latour, B. (2004). *Politics of Nature: How to Bring the Sciences into Democracy* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).
- Norton, B. G. (2005). *Sustainability: A Philosophy of Adaptive Ecosystem Management* (Chicago, Ill./London: University of Chicago Press).
- Pearce, F. (2006). *When the Rivers Run Dry: What Happens When Our Water Runs Out*? Eden Books. Rosen, C. M. (2003 ). "Industrial Ecology and the Transformation of Corporate Environmental management: A Business Historian's Perspective," in A. Molella and J. Bedi (eds), *Inventing for the Environment* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Serres, M. (1982). "Lucretius: Science and Religion," in J. V. Harari and D. F. Bell (eds), *Hermes: Literature, Science, Philosophy* (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press), pp. 98–124. Originally published as "Conditions culturelle. Violence et contrat: Science et religion," in M. Serres (1977), *La Naissance de la physique dans le texts de Lucrèce: Fleuves et turbulences* (Paris: Minuit).
- Sobel, D. (1995). *Longitude: The True Story of a Lone Genius Who Solved the Greatest Scientific Problem of His Time* (Harmondsworth: Penguin).
- Steinfeld, H., Gerber, P., Wassenaar, T., Castel, V., Rosales, M. and deHaan, C. (2006). *Livestock's Long Shadow: Environmental Issues and Options,* Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, LEAD website http: www.virtualcentre.org
- Whiteside, K. H. (2002). *Divided Natures: French Contributions to Political Ecology* (Cambridge, Mass./London: MIT Press).
