---
images: []
order: 160
title: The Tension between Sustainability and Diversity and the Quest for Unity
---

Climate change, air pollution, deforestation, loss of biodiversity, stratospheric ozone depletion, land and freshwater degradation – all these environmental problems have effects that transcend national boundaries; they cannot be solved by the unilateral decisions of individual states but require international cooperation. Moreover, these problems are interconnected and cannot be solved in isolation but require an integrated approach. But such an approach is frustrated by the existing multiplicity of communities with diverse and sometimes diverging ethical visions and moral vocabularies. Hence there is a strong tension between the diversity of actors that have a stake in sustainable development and the need for a close cooperation between these various stakeholders. There is a general tendency to resolve this tension by a forced striving for unity. This quest usually takes one of the following directions: it is aimed at one world community without borders, at a new comprehensive worldview, or at a universal scientific method.

#### *One world community*

Because environmental problems usually transcend state borders and are closely interrelated, they require an integrated approach. It seems that such an approach can only succeed if world politics loses the anarchistic character that is inherent to the system of sovereign states that gradually spread around the world after the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648. That, at least, is the opinion of Peter Singer. In an era of globalization, Singer insists in his book *One World*, we should abandon the idea of

sovereign states and replace it with "a sense that we really are one community" (Singer 2004: 7). We should go beyond the existing state boundaries and develop an ethics without borders – a "one-world-ethics."

However, the process of globalization that Singer so positively refers to goes hand in hand with a process of decentralization and fragmentation in most states: the restriction of state power and state control "from above" is accompanied by a restriction "from below." But this picture is far from complete – because the locus of power, control and decision-making has moved not only "upward" and "downward" from the state level, but also sideward, partly to the market and partly to civil society. So, actually, we have to do with a double shift in governance: a *vertical* shift from the national level to more global and to more local levels, and a *horizontal* shift from the state to the market and to civil society. These worldwide shifts in governance have led to a significant increase in levels of decision-making (*multi-level governance*) and to a considerable growth of the number of private and public players (*multi-actor governance*). Instead of the advent of Singer's single-world community we actually witness an ongoing multiplication of communities. Increasingly, policy-makers are dealing with a wide array of groups which do not necessarily speak each other's language or share similar conceptions of the world. With that many voices and vocabularies and that many interests at stake, the specter of the Tower of Babel looms large. Especially in contested matters such as scarce natural resources, multiple conflicts arise. At the same time, the sustainable management of these natural resources requires an integrated approach and a close cooperation among all groups involved. So, again, the question is: How should the tension between sustainability and diversity be resolved?

#### *One worldview*

Both environmental philosophers and activists tend to resolve this tension by developing a new comprehensive worldview that would provide the unifying power that seems indispensable for dealing with the environmental crisis. Most environmental philosophers and activists agree with Martin Heidegger's criticism of the anthropocentrism of Western metaphysics. If man sets himself up as the measure and master of all things, nature will appear solely as "material" that he can control and command as he pleases. This metaphysical disease can only be cured with the help of a different metaphysical worldview. To prevent the environmental crisis from ending in catastrophe, we should turn away from anthropocentrism and convert to some sort of biocentrism or ecocentrism: we should no longer treat nature in terms of her instrumental significance for our survival and self-preservation but instead acknowledge and respect her intrinsic value. Typically, such a new metaphysics evolves along holistic lines and bears an ecological stamp, according to the slogan that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts and that everything is connected to and dependent on everything else.

However, the way to resolve the tension between sustainability and diversity through a new, comprehensive and unifying worldview turns out to be a blind alley as well. Since Emmanuel Kant, modern philosophy has left the road from diversity to unity and has taken the opposite road: the road from unity to diversity – to differentiation, decentering, dissemination, deconstruction, dissensus and discontinuity, to name a few

of the terms in circulation to describe this process. This road from unity to diversity culminates in the work of Jean-François Lyotard, who with a great fanfare has proclaimed the end of the grand narratives (*meta-écrits*). The aversion of contemporary philosophers to grand narratives is only too understandable. Such narratives have an ethnocentric character because they are products of a specific time and place. Furthermore, recent history demonstrates that such narratives, exactly because of their claims to totality and unity, show terrorist features – they suppress and destroy everything that is incompatible with these narratives. This is also the case with ecologically inspired narratives of the future ("green utopias") that enjoy great popularity among environmental philosophers and activists. So we had better stop the quest for grand narratives and try to accept and live with the multitude and variety of ethical visions and moral vocabularies. But, then, again, the question arises: how is cooperation possible at all under these pluralist conditions?

#### *The universal scientific method*

The third way to answer this question is "science." This pathway is frequently taken because the supposed universal character of science looks like a watertight guarantee for the unity that seems essential for a collaborative solution to global environmental problems. But, again, this solution, too, turns out to be a mock-solution. The image of science as an objective and impartial provider of the empirical facts and rational explanations upon which politicians and policy-makers can safely rely has become outdated. Especially in the case of very complex problems like climate change, biotechnology or genomics, this traditional image no longer matches reality. With these disciplines we find ourselves each time in a situation in which "the facts are uncertain, values in dispute, stakes high and decisions urgent."

Under these conditions the puzzle-solving strategies of "normal science" (in the Kuhnian sense) are no longer appropriate and we have to switch over to what Silvio Funtowicz and Jerome Ravetz have called "post-normal science." The most prominent feature of post-normal science is the extension of the peer community and the inclusion of an ever growing set of scientific and non-scientific stakeholders. The boundaries between science and society are becoming more and more blurred, with the result that all existing societal conflicts are penetrating the heart of science itself. So science no longer exists as an independent and impartial agency outside or above society, and is therefore no longer able to provide politicians and policy-makers with objective rules and universal guidelines.
