---
images: []
order: 164
title: The Science of Global Warming
---

By absorbing infra-red or "heat" radiation from the earth's surface, "greenhouse gases" present in the atmosphere, such as water vapor and carbon dioxide, act as blankets over the earth's surface, keeping it warmer than it would otherwise be. The existence of this natural "greenhouse effect" has been known for nearly two hundred years; it is essential to the provision of our current climate, to which ecosystems and we humans have adapted.

Since the beginning of the industrial revolution around 1750, one of these greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide, has increased by over 35 percent and is now over 380 parts per million (ppm) – a higher concentration in the atmosphere than for many hundreds of thousands of years. Chemical analysis demonstrates that this increase is due largely to the burning of fossil fuels – coal, oil and gas. If no action is taken to curb these emissions, the carbon dioxide concentration will rise during the twenty-first century to two or three times its pre-industrial level.

The climate record over past centuries shows a lot of natural variability arising from external factors (such as changes in the sun's energy or the influence of volcanoes) or from internal variations within the climate system. However, the rise in global average temperature (and its rate of rise) during the twentieth century is well outside this range of known natural variability. The twelve warmest years in the instrumental record that goes back to 1860 have occurred since 1990. A more striking statistic is that each of the first eight months of 1998 was the warmest on record for that month. There is very strong evidence that most of the warming over the last fifty years is due to the increase of greenhouse gases, especially carbon dioxide.

Over the twenty-first century the global average temperature is projected to rise by between 2 and 6°C (3.5 to 11°F) from its pre-industrial level; the range represents different assumptions about greenhouse gas emissions and the sensitivity of the climate. For *global average* temperature, a rise of this amount is large. Its difference between the middle of an ice age and the warm periods in between is only about 5 or 6°C. So, associated with likely warming in the twenty-first century will be a rate of change of climate equivalent to, say, half an ice age in less than a hundred years – a larger rate of change than for at least 10,000 years. Adapting to this will be difficult for both humans and many ecosystems.

### The Impacts of Global Warming

Talking in terms of changes of global average temperature, however, tells us rather little about the impacts on human communities. There will be some positive impacts – for instance a longer growing season at high latitudes. But most impacts will be adverse.1 One obvious impact will be due to the rise in sea level (of about half a meter [20 inches] a century) that is mainly occurring because ocean water expands as it is heated. This rise will continue for many centuries – to warm the deep oceans as well as the surface waters takes a long time. This will cause large problems for human communities living in low-lying regions. Many areas – for instance in Bangladesh, southern China, islands in the Indian and Pacific oceans, and similar places elsewhere in the world – will be impossible to protect, and many millions will be displaced.

There will also be impacts from extreme events. The extremely unusual heatwave in central Europe during the summer of 2003 led to the death of over 20,000 people. Careful analysis leads to the projection that such summers are likely to be average by the middle of the twenty-first century and cool by the year 2100.

Water is becoming an increasingly important resource. A warmer world will lead to more evaporation of water from the surface, more water vapor in the atmosphere and more precipitation on average. Of greater importance is the fact that the increased condensation of water vapor in cloud formation leads to greater release of latent heat of condensation. Since this latent heat provides the largest source of energy driving the atmosphere's circulation, the hydrological cycle will become more intense. This means a tendency to more intense rainfall events and also less rainfall in some semi-arid areas. The most recent estimates indicate by 2050 a typical increase in many places of around a factor of five in the risk of the most extreme floods and droughts.2 Since, on average, floods and droughts are the most damaging of the world's disasters, their greater frequency and intensity is bad news for most human communities and especially for those regions such as Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan Africa where such events already occur only too frequently. These sorts of events provide some credence for the comparison of climate with weapons of mass destruction.

Sea-level rise, changes in water availability, and extreme events will lead to increasing pressure from environmental refugees. A careful estimate has suggested that, owing to climate change, there could be more than 150 million extra refugees by 2050.3 The rapidity of climate change will also have a large impact on ecosystems and lead to substantial loss of biodiversity.

In addition to the main impacts summarized above are changes about which there is less certainty, but if they occurred would be highly damaging and probably irreversible. For instance, large changes are being observed in polar regions. If the temperature rises more than about 3°C (∼5°F) in the area of Greenland, it is estimated that meltdown of the ice cap would begin. Complete meltdown is likely to take many centuries, but it would add 7 meters (23 feet) to the sea level.

### Can We Believe the Evidence?

How sure are we about the scientific story I have just presented? It is largely based on the assessments by the world scientific community carried out through the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).4 I had the privilege of being chairman or co-chairman of the Panel's scientific assessment from its beginning in 1988 to 2002. Many hundreds of scientists from many countries were involved in its work. No assessments on any other scientific topic have been so thoroughly researched and reviewed. In June 2005, the Academies of Science of the world's eleven most important countries (the G8 plus India, China and Brazil) issued a statement endorsing the IPCC's conclusions.5

Unfortunately, there are strong vested interests that have spent tens of millions of dollars on spreading misinformation about the climate change issue. They first denied the scientific evidence and more recently have argued that its impacts will not be large, that we can "wait and see," and in any case we can always "fix" the problem if it turns out to be substantial. The scientific evidence cannot support such arguments.
