---
images: []
order: 165
title: International Agreement Required
---

Global emissions of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere from fossil fuel burning are currently approaching 7 billion tonnes of carbon per annum and rising rapidly. Unless strong measures are taken, they will reach two or three times their present levels during the twenty-first century and climate change will continue unabated. To halt climate change during the twenty-first century, global emissions must be reduced to a small fraction of their present levels before the century's end.

Because of the work of the IPCC and its first report in 1990, the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 was able to address the climate change issue and the action that needed to be taken. The Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) – agreed by over 160 countries, signed by President George Bush, Snr, for the USA and subsequently ratified unanimously by the US Senate – agreed that Parties to the Convention should take "precautionary measures to anticipate, prevent or minimise the causes of climate change and mitigate its adverse effects. Where there are threats of irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing such measures."

More particularly, the Objective of the FCCC in its Article 2 is "to stabilise greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that does not cause dangerous interference with the climate system" and that is consistent with sustainable development. Such stabilization would also eventually stop further climate change. However, because of the long time that carbon dioxide resides in the atmosphere, the lag in the response of the climate to changes in greenhouse gases (largely because of the time taken for the ocean to warm), and the time taken for appropriate human action to be agreed, the achievement of such stabilization will take at least the best part of a century.

One of the largest challenges faced by the international community is how emissions of carbon dioxide can be shared fairly between nations. Currently great disparity exists between emissions by rich nations compared with those by poorer ones. Expressed in tonnes of carbon per capita per annum, they vary from about 5.5 for the USA, 2.2 for Europe, 0.7 for China and 0.2 for India. Further, the global average per capita, currently about 1 tonne per annum, must fall substantially during the twenty-first century. A proposal by the Global Commons Institute6 is that emissions should first be allocated to everybody in the world equally per capita, with transfer of allocations then being allowed through trading between nations. The logic and the basic equity of this proposal is in principle compelling; in practice, it will not be easy to achieve.

The Kyoto Protocol agreed by the FCCC in 1997 finally came into force in 2005. It represents a beginning for the process of mandatory reduction in greenhouse gases, averaging about 5 percent below 1990 levels by 2012 by those developed countries that have ratified the protocol. It is an important start, demonstrating the achievement of a useful measure of international agreement on such a complex issue. It also introduces for the first time international trading of greenhouse gas emissions so that reductions can be achieved in the most cost-effective ways.

Serious discussion is now beginning about international agreements for emissions reductions post-Kyoto. These must include all major emitters in both developed and developing countries. Regarding a target level for stabilization of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, most proposals7 now fall within the range of 450 to 550 ppm in terms of equivalent CO2, <sup>8</sup> which means 400 to 490 ppm in terms of CO2 alone. This implies a reduction in global carbon dioxide emissions from the current level by over 50 percent by 2050. The UK government, for instance, has taken a lead and has agreed a target for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions of 60 percent by 2050 – a target that recognizes that developed countries need to make greater reductions to allow some headroom for developing countries.

Those in the developed countries have already benefited over many generations from abundant fossil fuel energy. As is recognized by the FCCC, the realization that the adverse impacts of climate change will fall disproportionately on poorer nations creates a strong moral imperative for urgent action by industrialized countries.
