---
images: []
order: 174
title: Preamble
---

Because technologies develop apace and continue to find new applications, and because environmental science is currently an academic growth area, any attempt to catalog examples of mutual influence is doomed to incompleteness from the outset. An alternative approach is to consider three principal questions one can ask about the connection between technology and any scientific area and then to ask how the answers will be distinctive in the case of at least some of the environmental sciences. The three questions are:

- 1. Does technological development drive the research agenda? If so, how and to what extent?
- 2. In the long term, can successful research be expected to lead to innovative technological development? If so, how?
- 3. To what extent and in what ways is empirical investigation dependent on technology and technological development?

Answers to the questions, especially once one gets to any level of detail, will differ for different areas of scientific investigation; but there is reason to think that, even when working at a relatively high level of generality, there are some distinctive ways in which the answers for environmental sciences will differ from those given for more traditional, laboratory sciences such as physics, chemistry and biology.

First, however, there should be some clarification of what is included under "environmental science," even though there is no unique, clearly agreed definition of this term. One useful broad indication is that it covers "all those disciplines which are concerned with the physical, chemical, and biological surroundings in which organisms live" and that it is "especially concerned with changes wrought by human activities, and their immediate and long-term implications for the welfare of living organisms."1 The introduction to environmental science from which these quotes are taken covers earth sciences and the study of physical resources, the biosphere and the study of biological resources, and environmental management. The author also points out that one of the distinctive features of environmental science is that its conduct frequently involves assembling a team of specialists from different disciplines to address a particular issue.2 Another introductory text, without any claims to completeness, gives a table listing twenty-six kinds of environmental issue of current concern as a way of indicating the broad scope of environmental science.3 These issues range from concerns about pollution through resource depletion and waste disposal to global warming.

What this tells us is that the research agenda of contemporary environmental science is significantly driven by impacts of technological development that have become matters of public concern rather than by theoretically generated research problems.4 The impetus to study many aspects of "the environment" as environment arose both from concern about the impact of industrial and agricultural technologies and from a desire to utilize natural resources efficiently and effectively without causing their disappearance through overexploitation. And the possibilities of overexploitation increase as more effective exploitative technologies are developed. Concern might be over the disappearance of particular wildlife species in a given area, obvious air or water pollution or feared, less obvious radiological or chemical contamination. Just as the research agenda of medical science is significantly driven by the need to address human health issues, the research agenda of environmental science is significantly driven by the need to address issues of the "health" of the environmental systems on which our lives, and those of other organisms, depend, particularly where it seems that humans have had a hand in causing the problem through their deployment of new technologies or techniques. There is a tacit assumption at work that if human beings, through their activities, including their use of technology, have caused a problem there should be a way of remedying it by changing what we do or the way in which we do it. So, to the extent that environmental science can indicate the causes of a problem and develop an understanding of the systems involved, it can at least set the stage for proposed technological and/or behavioral fixes and would continue to play a role in evaluating their success. But its research would not *per se* provide a basis for devising technology to provide the fix; it would merely set the parameters of the technological problem.

A brief and oversimplified account of the issue of acid rain illustrates one way in which this can work. In the 1950s air pollution from power stations was a concern of communities living near them. In response to local pressures, energy companies built higher smokestacks dispersing the pollution over a wider region and diverting it from the local population. In the 1960s and 1970s people living and working in forested regions well away from obvious point-sources of pollution noticed dramatic die-off of trees. Environmental scientists (in the role of environmental detectives) determined that this was a result of acid rain, itself a result of sulfur and nitrogen dioxide emissions from tall power-station smokestacks.5 Prevention of acid rain then becomes a technological and political problem – how to reduce emissions (design and install "scrubbers" to reduce the sulfur and nitrogen dioxide content of smokestack emissions), and how to require power-generating companies (possibly in a state or country other than that experiencing the damaging effects of acid rain) to install scrubbers.

However, it would be misleading to suggest that environmental science is always driven by reaction to already recognized negative impacts of technology. Now that people have been alerted to the fact that deployment and use of technology can have unexpected and unintended effects on surrounding ecosystems, public works in many countries cannot be approved without an environmental impact assessment having been conducted. So one significant role for environmental scientists is the production of environmental impact assessments for proposed new developments.6 Equally, as these sciences have developed their own research base and have acquired the resources to gather increasing amounts of data on an ongoing basis, scientists themselves have increasingly sought to raise public awareness of negative environmental impacts of our use of technology that they have detected and that they believe have the potential to pose serious threats if not addressed. This has been the case, for example, with the effect of CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons, used in refrigerators and aerosols) on the ozone layer, of female hormones (used in birth control pills and hormone replacement therapy) on the reproductive systems of fish, and the global warming effect of increased use of fossil fuels. In such cases, environmental science becomes a basis for setting a technological agenda, since very often people would rather find a technological solution than cease engaging in the activity the problem technologies support.

Any science is dependent on technology for its instrumentation, for constructing experimental set-ups, performing analyses or routine tests, making measurements, and collecting and processing data. Technological development enhances existing procedures and creates the possibility of whole new kinds of empirical investigation. In this respect technologies form part of the conditions of possibility for the existence of the empirical study of ranges of phenomena to which they afford access. Certainly environmental sciences have this in common with other natural sciences. However, theoretical developments in basic sciences – physics, chemistry, molecular biology – often lead to technological innovation and the development of technological devices some of which prompt development of new scientific instrumentation – the history of microscopes from early low-resolution optical instruments to electron scanning microscopes and other scanning devices provides just one sequence of examples. Because the environmental sciences, for the most part, do not have the revelation of fundamental laws, processes or entities as their goal, but rather draw on the resources provided by physics, chemistry and biology, it is not to be expected that work in these sciences will lead to the kind of technological innovation that would result in new scientific instrumentation. However, there are always exceptions, and one famous exception is the development of the cloud chamber, used by physicists for the detection of fundamental particles and the results of their collisions. This had its origins in attempts to reproduce clouds in the laboratory with a view to demonstrating that rain can be caused by an electrical discharge in the absence of particulate matter.7

Because the environmental sciences must deal with and seek to integrate understanding of phenomena occurring on wildly different temporal and spatial scales, the range of technologies on which they depend for data collection and integration is much broader than that of standard laboratory sciences. The history of Global Environmental Science (predominantly interdisciplinary earth systems analysis), for example, is closely interwoven with the history of the development transport, communication and military technologies and with technological ambitions to manipulate our earthly environment on a grand scale. But such global studies could not themselves develop without the development of modern communication, command, control and information technologies (computers, satellites, automated remote sensing devices). In order for phenomena exhibited on a global scale to become objects of scientific study and investigation, there have to be ways of revealing and studying phenomena on that scale.

Early meteorology was a matter of keeping systematic daily, weekly, monthly and yearly records of such things as temperature, atmospheric pressure, wind speed and direction, rainfall, cloud cover and visibility on a local basis, and of recognizing patterns in these records on the basis of which to attempt to produce short- and medium-term forecasts. With the expansion and development of shipping and then air transportation, accurate short-term forecasting became increasingly important. As Monmonier says, "Maps that could warn of storms and cold waves were a triumphant collaboration of science, technology, bureaucracy and cartography."8 The requisite technology was the electric telegraph that for the first time made possible the rapid collection of perishable data from widely separated weather observers and the subsequent communication of forecasts. Bureaucracy was required to provide the institutional framework and funding for the system of weather stations and weather observers.

Here we see one of the challenges of constructing empirically derived representations of global phenomena: data collection, coordination and processing for dynamic conditions on such a scale is no trivial matter and was in many cases impossible before the development of modern electronic, computer and satellite technologies, and even now this enterprise faces significant challenges. Routine data collection on such a scale requires international coordination and cooperation, and very considerable financial investment. The sheer size of global data sets used by climatologists means that they would yield nothing intelligible to a human being were it not for the existence of fast computers programmed to process them and render them usable.

Global environmental sciences depend on and continually push the limits of computer processing capacity for another reason – there is no way that most hypotheses about the nature and function of global systems can be tested empirically. The Earth is not a convenient experimental object and is, so far as we know, the only accessible one of its kind. For this reason, computer modeling has become a vital part of Earth systems research. But early computer development was itself shaped by recognition that development of numerical methods for handling the equations of fluid dynamics and of devices that would then handle the resulting mass of computations would provide a crucial tool for use in atomic energy and weapons development, oil and gas exploration and weather forecasting. Von Neumann and Edward Teller both viewed the Earth as a newfound object of technological manipulation and control, thanks to the potential of nuclear technology. Project Plowshare, created in 1958 and funded by the US Congress in 1964, was to explore the possibilities of using nuclear explosions for the creation of harbors and a sea-level replacement for the Panama Canal and even to modify the climate of North America. A history of this project (Kirsch 2005) contains the comment that "In the laboratories and proving grounds of the Project Plowshare, the histories of experiment and environment meet." Some of the tools developed here made global environmental science possible and created the technological possibility of detecting and monitoring global effects of human activity and even, paradoxically, of revealing the complete impracticality of proposals to control the Earth's climate. Early attempts to construct a computer model of the Earth's climate system opened the door to the systematic study and recognition of non-linear systems and the limits that these place on our capacity for prediction and control. In this respect, the pursuit of global environmental science has prompted a reframing of some technological ambitions and a rethinking of the technology–environment interface.

#### Notes

- 1. Allaby (1996), p. 2.
- 2. ibid., p. 3.
- 3. Hadlock (1998), pp. 6–8.
- 4. This is not to say that the latter do not exist, but that to an extent greater than for basic sciences – environmental science exists at the interface between techno-political–economic practical problems and theoretically based research sciences.
- 5. In the US at least, this episode illustrated another not untypical pattern of development in environmental science research. In response to the acid rain problem, Congress in 1980 funded a ten-year scientific research program (NAPAP) in their desire to have the authority of science behind a planned new regulatory policy. Lots of good scientific research was done within different academic specializations, and the systems involved were much better understood as a result, but the specialists involved did not coordinate their research efforts around the policy problem, and as a result the work could not be integrated to form the basis of any policy recommendations. (See Rubin, Lave and Morgan 1991.)
- 6. At the University of Hawaii the Environmental Center was legislative-funded precisely to perform this function for the State of Hawaii.
- 7. See Galison (1997) for details.
- 8. Monmonier (1999), p. 7.

### References and Further Reading

- Allaby, M. (1996). *Basics of Environmental Science* (London/New York: Routledge).
- Gallison, P. (1997). *Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).
- Hadlock, C. R. (1998). *Mathematical Modeling in the Environment* (Washington, D.C.: Mathematical Association of America).
- Kirsch, S. (2005). *Proving Grounds: Project Plowshare and the Unrealized Dream of Nuclear Earthmoving* (New Brunswick, N.J./London: Rutgers University Press).
- Monmonier, M. (1999). *Air Apparent: How Meteorologists Learned to Map, Predict, and Dramatize the Weather* (Chicago, Ill./London: University of Press).
- Rubin, E. S., Lave, L. B. and Morgan, M. Granger (1991). "Keeping Climate Research Relevant," *Issues in Science and Technology*, National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute of Medicine, Winter 1991–2, pp. 47–55.
