---
images: []
order: 177
title: JOHN R. PORTER AND JESPER RASMUSSEN
---

Agriculture is the human practice of cultivating the land and domesticating animals to produce food, fiber and energy. In a narrow sense, agriculture refers simply to production of these essential human commodities; in a wider sense, it refers to a human activity system that connects social and natural systems such that it is practically impossible to isolate changes in agriculture from changes in socio-economic and cultural conditions. Agriculture is a uniquely human activity and is perhaps the first activity for which humans developed technology. Technology, understood as the use of farming tools and techniques, is an indispensable component in agriculture. In the most general sense, technology permits humans to increase the capture and efficient utilization of solar radiation that drives primary plant production that is the basis of the human food and fiber chain.

Humans have cultivated the land since about 10,000 years ago when the global population reached 1 million. Before that time, and for the preponderance of human history, humans had hunted and gathered their food, fiber and energy since *Homo sapiens* diverged from its ancestors about 200,000 years ago (Evans 1998). The transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture, represented by the Neolithic Revolution, was adopted by various independent prehistoric human societies, in various locations. This transition created major social change, including the organization of hierarchical communities, settlements and higher population densities. In the 10,000 years leading to ad 1000, the human population increased a hundredfold from 5 million to 500 million people. In the second millennium, the effect was even more profound in absolute terms as 500 million people became 6,000 million. Both the hypothesis that human population growth drove the need for increased food production and thus agriculture and its obverse, that cultivation permitted population increase, have been suggested. It is probably the case that multiple causes rather than a simple causal relationship link land cultivation to population growth.

Today more than 75 percent of the land area of Europe is cultivated for crops, grassland or forestry production, and humans appropriate about 40 percent of global terrestrial net primary productivity for their own use. In rich, demographically stable countries the effects of agriculture and forestry on biodiversity and the cycles of carbon, nutrients and water are social and political issues that are rarely out of the news. Land cultivation, and particularly its management intensity, is the most influential human

practice for the dynamics of the terrestrial landscape and thereby the atmospheric, biogeochemical and water cycles of the Earth system. The current production of food affects the main global biogeochemical cycles and is heavily reliant on inputs of fossil fuel energy and technology. Farmers use such products of fossil fuels as nitrogen fertilizer, herbicides and pesticides and machinery to increase the proportion of solar energy that is captured by crops to drive dry matter production and thereby harvested yield. It is only in the past 250 years out of the 10,000 years that human beings have cultivated the land for food that they have been able to swap the toil of long hours in the field, to increase solar energy capture, for less humanly demanding methods.

The base of the human food chain is largely formed by the grasses rice, maize, wheat and tropical species such as sorghum and millet. Wheat provides a clear example of the modern link between technology and agriculture. Wheat has been bred not to shed its seeds, to have a high yield index, to have a high response to nitrogen fertilizer, to need the protection against weeds and diseases afforded by chemicals, and is harvested by enormous machines driven by one person and is the most globally traded crop being carried around the world in large ships. The importance of wheat as a crop for humans is such that, of the 1.4 billion hectares of land (Evans 1998) devoted to arable cultivation, wheat is harvested from about 15 percent of it; direct consumption of wheat contributes 20 percent of the calories and 22 percent of the protein in the human diet (Amthor 2001). As more than 30 per cent of harvested wheat is fed to animals and thence to humans as milk or meat, the place of wheat as the most important human food source is unrivalled.

Technology in agriculture probably started with the stone ax that was used to clear forest trees and fire that was used to release the nutrients in the wood and thereby provide a rich soil for food plants. This was shifting cultivation and was the first step, beyond hunter-gatherer communities, in the settlement of human societies. The Neolithic revolution saw the domestication of crops and animals, and the consequent necessity for social stability to guard these precious resources. The act of harvesting the wild grains changed them genetically. A small percentage of wild grass plants have seeds that cling to the stalk even when ripe, rather than separating easily. Humans collecting wheat or barley seed would thus gather a disproportionate amount of the clinging mutant in each harvest, and plants were thereby domesticated.

Later animals were domesticated to be draught animals, which led to a large increase in the power available for cultivation. In the animal-powered agriculture, the main technological developments were plows, harrows, carts and wagons. Oxen were domesticated as draught animals 6,000 years before the present. Animal-powered agriculture increased in efficiency in the Middle Ages, when horses replaced cows as draught animals, and the first primitive European plow dates from about 3,500 years ago. These primitive scratch-plows consisted of a frame holding a vertical wooden stick that was dragged through the topsoil. In the Middle Ages, plows were fitted with wheels and shares that inverted soil. The wheel plow changed little until the 1700s when the swing plow was invented with fittings and a coulter made of iron and a moldboard and share covered with an iron plate. The use of the swing plow was closely linked to new crop management practices in the 1700s, which started modern Western agriculture. For example, in Northern Europe, the horse-driven swing plow was linked to the introduction of a crop rotational system with fodder crops that comprised temporal rotations of root

crops, two cereals, clover and grass, with the clover being the "driver" of the system via its symbiotic ability to fix nitrogen into the soil from the air. This rotation replaced a three-year crop rotation that had been practiced since the Middle Ages rotating rye or winter wheat in year one, followed by spring oats or barley in the second year, and followed by a third year of fallow. The abolition of fallow lands and the introduction of legume-based fodder in crop rotations increased agricultural production and mechanization. The agrarian revolution of the 1700s is a clear example of how technology was linked to agricultural change and how, at the same time, this underpinned other changes in society such as industrialization and the beginnings of the metropolitan life. The same period also saw the start of the chemical control of plant and animal diseases, and the start of systematic plant-breeding and selection based on the later discoveries of the principles of genetics by Mendel.

The next major technological change in agriculture involved the increased use of fossil fuels in direct and indirect ways, and this occurred in the early to middle years of the 1900s. Between the collapse of the New York stock market in 1929 and the end of the Second World War the number of tractors in use on farms in the USA increased from 1 million to 2.5 million, while the number of horses fell from 20 million to 12 million over the same period (Evans 1998). Cheaper nitrogen fertilizers were also produced based on the Haber process, dependent on access to abundant and cheap sources of fossil energy. Synthetic chemicals based on analogs of plant hormones were also being invented for weeds, and neurological toxins were used for pest control. Food became and has remained as much a matter of eating oil-produced energy as solar energy fixed by photosynthesis. Globalized agriculture followed the revolution in fossil-fuel-dependent transportation in the 1800s and 1900s. In globalized modern agriculture, animal husbandry has developed into industrial-like plants, where the animal production is separated from fodder inputs that may now originate a long distance from where they are consumed.

There are many connections between agriculture, technology and philosophy. Agriculture was mainly based on traditions and traditional knowledge systems and indigenous knowledge until the 1700s, when agriculture was influenced by scientific progress and the philosophy of the Enlightenment that confirmed faith in man, reason and progress. One of the first theories of the new scientific agriculture stated that more forage meant more cattle that meant more manure and thus more cereals. This thinking resulted in the growing of forage crops in the crop rotation, which led to the decline of the old agro-pastoral system.

Questions such as whether technological agricultural developments drive population increase or vice-versa, the nature of the agricultural production paradigm such as between conventional and organic farming, and the very question of what should be the function of agriculture – for example food or energy production – each represent a differently weighted interplay between technology and philosophy in agriculture. The role of technology in food production has been twofold; first, and most basically, to increase the proportion of photosynthetically active solar energy that is utilized by crops, thereby raising crop yields that form the basis of the human food chain. More recently, technology has been used to alter the composition of food and to change its nutritional and processing properties. Recent attempts to alter genetically the make-up of plants used for food production have met resistance, mainly in Europe, whereas many

emerging economies have embraced biotechnology with enthusiasm. One important issue raised by the advent of biotechnology has been the question of ownership and intellectual property protection. The private and exclusive ownership of technological products and processes in agriculture has been extended to include plant and animal varieties. These have traditionally either been part of a social and cultural heritage, and thus freely available, or have been under legal protection designed to foster their utilization by non-owning others. Such developments in ownership, fostered by the application of gene technology to agriculture, will have profound consequences for a human activity that forms the basis of human society.

In summary, except in the most "primitive" societies, humans have always found means to harness their intellects to solving the problem of having enough food to eat. In the time that humans have cultivated the land they can be said to have escaped the Malthusian logic of population regulation two and a half times – in the mid-1800s when the population rose above 1 billion for the first time and in the mid-1900s when the population reached 3 billion. The Green Revolution of the mid- to late 1900s (the "half ") represented the cultural export of the agricultural lessons learned in the energy-rich postwar Western world to the developed world. As L. P. Hartley wrote at the start of his novel *The Go-Between*, "The past is a foreign country: they do things differently there"; and, thus, how far the future of agriculture can repeat its past successes in a world of limited and not limitless cheap energy combined with a global population of 9–10 billion is one of the great challenges of the 2100s.
