---
images: []
order: 179
title: Preamble
---

### 1. Environmental Impact

The built environment, the world of houses and cities, is considered responsible for two-fifths of the world's energy consumption. In the United States, it is estimated that one-sixth of all energy is used for air-conditioning alone on hot summer days; this can go up to 43 percent of the peak power load.1 The impact on the environment is obviously enormous. The US Department of Energy estimates that heating and cooling systems in the United States emit each year over half a billion tons of carbon dioxide and generate about a fourth of the sulfur dioxide that goes into the atmosphere (sulfur dioxide is the main ingredient in acid rain).2 According to the World Resources Institute, heating, cooling and lighting buildings together make up 12 percent of US greenhouse gas emissions (which amounts to about 3 percent of global warming gases).3

A telling metaphor for the environmental impact of the built environment is its "ecological footprint." The term was introduced by William Rees in 1992 to indicate the bioproductive land and water area that is required to support a human population with food and timber products and to assimilate wastes and emissions such as carbon dioxide. The ecological footprint is expressed in terms of "global hectares" (gha) and "global hectares per person" (gha/cap). Herbert Girardet has calculated the footprint of London in 1996 when it had around 7 million inhabitants and was covering a surface area of 158,000 ha.4 Given prevailing technology, on average 1.2 ha per person are required for food production and 1.5 ha per person for fuel production (needed for carbon sequestration) – that amounts to 8,400,000 ha and 10,500,000 ha respectively. If we add a forest area of 768,000 ha (required for wood products), it adds up to around 19,700,000 ha. Thus, London's footprint is 125 times its surface area – and nearly all of Britain's productive land (around 21 million ha).5 But, of course, the environmental effects of London are not limited to the United Kingdom; its footprint "stretches to far-flung places such as the wheat prairies of Kansas, the tea-gardens of Assam, the forests of Scandinavia and Amazonia, and the copper mines of Zambia."6

It should not come as a surprise that in many countries the environmental impact of cities is increasing owing to their rapid growth. In 1950 only Greater London and New York City had a population of more than 8 million;7 today there are around thirteen such "Mega Cities." In 2000, twenty-three principal agglomerations contained more than 10 million inhabitants, and the World Bank estimated that twenty-seven Mega Cities will reach this size by 2015. The most obvious causes for this development are population growth and the rural exodus in many, especially developing, countries (in particular in Africa and Asia). Population growth is a well-known and -documented phenomenon. In 1950 the world's population was 4 billion, in 2000 it was 6 billion, and it is projected to be 9 billion in 2050. Although the growth rate of the human population has been steadily declining since the 1970s, the world population increases currently by more than 200,000 every day. As a consequence, more and more housing is needed. In addition, a rural exodus happens in many places, mostly where people in the countryside live below the poverty line and migrate to cities in order to find employment. (Mostly these are *also* the places with highest population growth, so that the effects of the two causes accumulate.) In many Mega Cities, the rapid growth of the urban population cannot be controlled, let alone planned, and leads to slum and squatter settlements. Most of these fall outside the realm of urban infrastructural projects and have inadequate roads, electricity and (most importantly) water supply. Although the absolute number of people with access to safe water and sanitation becomes bigger, population growth exceeds their number – WaterAid estimates that between 1990 and 2000 "an extra 900 million people were born in places without water and sanitation."8 Not surprisingly, the urban poor can be much worse off than the rural poor – the economic gains of moving to the city are often paid for by diseases such as diarrhea and other infections stemming from inadequate hygiene. (The infant mortality rate in the slums of Bangladesh is 142 per 1,000 live births, compared to the rural rate in India of 93.) Further, most of these places face critical environmental degradation as a result of overload on water sources and the uncontrolled extraction of water from depleted aquifers, improper waste disposal, and the contamination of ground water and rivers through poor sanitation measures. Yet improving the situation is often fighting a losing battle since many cities face an ever increasing demand while the quantity and quality of available water declines. In addition, there are often inadequate pollution controls and a lack of administrative order and political will.

While subdevelopment settlements are to be found mainly in developing countries, some cities in industrial nations are spreading in face of a stagnating population (or even while losing inhabitants); this happens mainly in Australia and the United States, but also in Europe – for example in Brussels, Copenhagen, Frankfurt, Munich and Zurich.9 This expansion is labeled (critically) as "urban sprawl": cities expand geographically in the form of suburbs of low-density housing, typically with *single-family homes* on big lots, separated by *lawns* and *roads.* They are distant to the city center and to industrial and commercial zones. The impact of low-density suburbs on the environment is twofold. On the one hand, there is more urbanized land, and thus more land surface rendered impervious by development that was formerly open and of a greater environmental value. On the other, these new developments are only possible because of – and are dependent on – personal cars as the main means of transportation. While cities before the middle of the nineteenth century were built around walking and other methods of transit, this is no longer practical. Jeff Kenworthy and Peter Newman coined the term "automobile dependence" in order to explain how modern cities inevitably lead to more automobile use. While an average inhabitant from central Melbourne makes

2.12 trips per day by car, an inhabitant of the fringe uses his car 3.92 times. Similarly, an inhabitant of the suburbs of New York needs more than five times the amount of gasoline than someone in its center.10 The central point is that population density is needed to make public transit possible: "Urban design, reflected chiefly in population and job densities, emerged as the most significant determinant of the travel patterns in cities around the world."11

Not only the operation of the built environment but also its construction – that means all activities such as development or demolition and disposal – have a major impact on the environment. Taken together, building construction and operations consume directly or indirectly around 54 percent of all energy generated in the United States.12 In 1999, according to the United Nations Environment Programme, construction activities are estimated to contribute over 35 percent of total global carbon dioxide emissions – more than any other industrial activity.13 No other sector uses more raw materials than construction; it accounts for an estimated 40 percent of all resource consumption. This point is illustrated when we look at cement concrete that is used in the construction of every part of the built environment (buildings, roads, bridges, etc.). Besides requiring crushed stone, gravel, sand and water, the central ingredient of cement concrete is cement; it is, on a per-unit basis, the component with the strongest impact on the environment. Globally 1.45 billion Mg of cement are produced every year requiring 2 percent of global primary energy and responsible for 5 percent of global carbon dioxide emissions.14 In the United States, 0.6 percent of the energy goes into cement production, though it is only 0.06 percent of the GNP.15 The construction industry is also the cause of enormous amounts of waste. In Australia, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands and the United States, for example, the waste of construction and demolition adds up to 13–29 percent of solid waste entering landfills.16 If one includes greenhouse gas emissions, the construction industry produces about 40 percent of all waste.17

Again, the effects obviously depend on the technology used. According to a report on California's construction industry, older equipment is a particular problem.18 Toxic diesel particulate matter pollution from older diesel tractors and bulldozers can cause severe cardiovascular and respiratory illnesses, asthma attacks and acute bronchitis. (For every additional 10 micrograms of 2.5 micron particles per cubic meter of air, an 18 percent increase in heart-attack deaths has been found.19) In 2005 at least 1,100 premature deaths in California (of which 731 were in Los Angeles and its suburban areas) were likely to have been caused by emissions from outdated construction equipment (there are an estimated 250,000 to 300,000 of such machines in California20). In 2005, the estimated public health cost due to California's construction industry was around \$9.1 billion.

### 2. Built Environment versus Environment?

The story of the built environment is part of man's domination of nature. A city as any building is a place that had to be wrested out of nature: forests must be rooted out, land cleared, and much that was hitherto part of a vital ecological system becomes covered by asphalt, concrete and brick. Le Corbusier called architecture an "assault on

nature" – and thought that he was complementing the city by doing so.21 Yet the often described dichotomous separation of humans (and in particular their technological artifacts) from nature in Western culture has seldom been radical in the built environment. New York's Central Park, urban sprawl, and every flowerpot on the windowsill show our "biophilia," that is, our deeply rooted fascination with nature and things that are alive.22 Even Etienne-Louis Boullée, whose abstract geometric style is far from showing any link to organic forms, did not reject nature entirely, his (never built) cenotaph for Isaac Newton being designed as a gigantic sphere embedded in a circular two-levelled base but topped with cypress trees.

Why, then, has the built environment turned inimical toward the un-built environment? A primary reason is surely ignorance and the difficulty in predicting future consequences of technical innovations and of the built environment; quantitative as much as qualitative consequences. In 1896, when New York City introduced asphalt paving in place of brick, granite and woodblock, no one could have foreseen that Houston (Texas) would build an asphalt highway that is in places eighteen lanes wide. And when the German engineer Carl Benz invented the car in 1886 he could not have anticipated the development of modern cities, which Peter Droege has baptized "Fossil Cities" (because their "very existence, form and growth dynamics are explained by the logic of the fossil fuel economy"23). After all, *Technology Assessment* is a relatively new term (coined in 1966) as much as a new science. *Environmental Impact Assessment*, a formal process used to predict the environmental consequences of a development project, was not introduced as a planning and decision-making tool before the late 1960s – in the United States in the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. (Ethical concerns about negative consequences of modern urban developments had, however, been raised much earlier – for example by Lewis Mumford in the late 1930s.)

Another factor is the difficulty of discerning many very slow destructive influences. The waste production or resource consumption of a small hamlet does not matter much, and only when the settlement grows do environmental impacts accumulate. After the 1913 opening of the aqueduct that allowed Los Angeles to bloom from a semi-arid desert, it took some decades (and the filling of many swimming pools) before Owens Lake had dried up and turned into a toxic wasteland. Slow and gradual processes are not merely difficult to predict but also easily escape our attention. It might be an inborn optimism or general laziness that makes humans blind to negative effects when they come upon us step by step. This has been described as the "Boiled Frog Syndrome."24 If a frog is in a pot of water that is gradually being heated, then the frog adjusts and continues to adjust its body temperature. The frog does not seem to feel uncomfortable – until, ultimately, it is boiled alive. Humans, like the frog, keep adjusting to the increasing health and ecological hazards, so that they often do not realize (or at least act against) the destruction of their environment and health, even if it becomes dramatic (Owens Lake) or highly dangerous (Mexico City averages 30 micrograms of fine particles per cubic meter of air).

Another, rather intricate reason for neglect of the environment could be added: it is often a result of applaudable attempts to satisfy human needs in an efficient way and on a large scale. To provide solid shelter, warm housing, or sufficient water and energy for everyone are rightly seen as *moral* demands. As Friedrich Schiller remarks on this point: "To nourish give him, to shelter./Have ye the naked bedecked,/Dignity

comes on its own."25 The human right to housing is also explicitly stated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: "Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care."26 Many ecologically (and psychologically) disastrous developments were built to provide housing for the socially weak and the needy among the population.

Yet things have changed. We have experienced the ambiguous nature of many developments, such as that of our fuel-based transportation technology and of cities based upon it. The apparent domination of man over nature turned out to be a selfdestructive illusion. We understand that regard for the environment and for future generations is an essential part of our *moral* obligation; the happiness and comfort of present and proximate generations should not be bought with the misery (or even nonexistence) of future ones. This radicalized universality of ethics has been expressed by Hans Jonas in his *Imperative of Responsibility*: "Act so that the effects of your action are compatible with the permanence of genuine human life!"27 Many are willing to listen to this imperative. To name but two examples: "Promoting Sustainable Human Settlement Development" has been spelled out as an important political goal in the *Agenda 21* (ch. 7), and "The Sustainable Cities Programme," a joint UN-HABITAT/UNEP facility, was established in the early 1990s. It seems that mankind is about to write a new chapter in the story of the built environment, called "The Sustainable City." We possess most of the technological skills needed to erect cities that are not inimical to the environment but are a vital part of it. However, such a transformation requires us changing some ideas about how we should live, ideas about traveling and about the space and energy that we think we need. And, if we are not willing to change them, the next chapter might never be written.

### Notes

- 1. Horvath, A. (2004). "Construction Materials and the Environment," *Annual Review of Environment and Resources*, 29: 186.
- 2. cf. http://www.eartheasy.com/article\_global\_warming.htm (2.1.2007).
- 3. Montague, T. and Montague, P. (2007). "Stepping Back from the Brink of Global Warming," *Rachel's Democracy and Health News*, 888 (4 January).
- 4. Girardet, H. (2000). "Greening Urban Society," in W. Fox (ed.), *Ethics and the Built Environment* (London: Routledge), pp. 15–30.
- 5. Depending on what is included in the footprint, it can be seen as being even higher. The WWF et al. (2006) ("Counting Consumption: CO2 Emissions, Material Flows and Ecological Footprint of the UK by Region and Devolved Country") calculate the ecological footprint of the Southeast population as approximately 6.3 gha/cap (which is seen as the highest in the UK) with food and agriculture 1.14 gha/cap, transport 1.26 gha/cap, and domestic energy and construction 1.3 gha/cap. (This equates to twenty-five times the actual land area.)
- 6. Girardet (2000), p. 19.
- 7. London lost nearly a million inhabitants between 1950 and 1996.
- 8. From "Mega Cities and Mega Slums in the 21st Century" by the editors of WaterAid Web, quoted from http://www.ittind.com/waterbook/mega\_cities.asp (2.1.2007).

#### christian illies

- 9. cf. Kenworthy, J., Laube, F. and Newman, P. (1999). *An International Sourcebook of Automobile Dependence in Cities, 1960–1990*. (Boulder, Colo.: University of Colorado Press).
- 10. Newman, P. and Kenworthy, J. (2006). "Urban Design to Reduce Automobile Dependence," *Opolis*, 2 (1): 40.
- 11. ibid., p. 42.
- 12. Horvath (2004), p. 186.
- 13. http://www.unep.or.jp/ietc/focus/EnergyCities1.asp
- 14. Worrell, E., Price, L., Martin, N., Hendriks, C. and Ozawa Meida, L. (2001). "Carbon Dioxide Emissions from the Global Cement Industry," *Annual Review of Energy and the Environment*, 26: 303–29.
- 15. Wilson, A. (1993). "Cement and Concrete: Environmental Considerations," *Environmental Building News*, 2 (2): 7–12.
- 16. Bossink, B. A. G. and Brouwers, H. J. H. (1996). "Construction Waste: Quantification and Source Evaluation," *Journal of Construction Engineering and Management*, 122 (1): 55–60.
- 17. http://www.rics.org/Builtenvironment/Sustainableconstruction/rics+view+sustainable+ construction.htm (11.12.2006).
- 18. "Digging up Trouble" by the Union of Concerned Scientists (http://www.ucsusa.org/ clean\_vehicles/california\_driving/digging-up-trouble.html; 2.1.2007).
- 19. Pope III, C. A., Muhlestein, J. B., May, H. T., Renlund, D. G., Anderson, J. L. and Horne, B. D. (2006). "Ischemic Heart Disease Events Triggered by Short-term Exposure to Fine Particulate Air Pollution," *Circulation*, 114: 2443–8.
- 20. See Wilson, J. (2006). "Dire Health Effects of Pollution Reported," *Los Angeles Times* (6 December) (http://www.precaution.org/lib/07/prn\_ucs\_diesel\_report.061207.htm; 2.1.2007).
- 21. cf. Harries, K. (1992). "Context, Confrontation, Folly," *Perspecta*, 27: 6–19.
- 22. Which might even be a genetically given preference (though surely refined through experience and culture); cf. Wilson, E. O. (1984). *Biophilia* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).
- 23. Droge, P. (2007). "Cities in the Age of Climate Change and Fossil Fuel Depletion," 1999– 2006, (http://www.solarcity.org/climate\_cities.htm; 23.2.2007).
- 24. See, for example, Saunders, T. (2002). *The Boiled Frog Syndrome: Your Health and the Built Environment* (Chichester: Wiley-Academy).
- 25. In *Die Würde des Menschen* (1796).
- 26. Article 25. It should be added that, again, this is a human right that is not everywhere duly respected. The UN Centre for Human Settlements estimates that 100 million people worldwide are homeless and over 1 billion people live in inadequate housing.
- 27. Jonas, H. (1984). *The Imperative of Responsibility* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press), p. 43.
