---
images: []
order: 184
title: EVAN SELINGER
---

Technological concerns are central to political history, political theory and political action. Since democracy requires a well-informed citizenry, civic responsibility is abdicated when the public does not make a concentrated effort to understand the conceptual and material links that connect technology and politics. Of course, the responsibility for being well informed does not fall solely on citizens themselves. Since information is presented and received in contextually specific ways, injustice occurs when the following events transpire: public education fails to prioritize the relevant issues; media bias diverts attention from matters of genuine concern and clouds real issues through spin; governments make bad-faith appeals to secrecy and security; and inequitable access to data marginalizes individuals and groups. In short, without a deep understanding of how ideas about and decisions concerning technology impact political processes, and without a sophisticated grasp of how political processes impact the development, distribution and use of technology, neither global nor local affairs can be comprehensively grasped or intelligently evaluated.

Given the profound inter-relation between technology and politics, as well as the difficulty of finding rigorous and appropriately critical frameworks to illuminate the central issues, the articles found in this section should not be seen as mere academic summaries. While they synthesize vast bodies of literature, they collectively transcend exegesis and offer political tools that citizens across the globe should find essential to their pursuits of justice and the good life.

Put in more specific terms, this section contains analyses of technology and politics that address topics most people have strong opinions about. It traverses issues concerning how technology relates to progress, power, culture, globalization, capitalism, energy, management, strategy, comparative governance, and gender. To ensure that the philosophical dimensions of all these issues shine through, we shall begin by discussing the more explicitly abstract ideas.

"The Idea of Progress" clarifies the fundamental problem of innovation. On the one hand, nations would not put significant resources into technical research and development if they did not believe that progress – economic, medical, military, environmental and recreational – would result. Progress is a widespread regulative ideal, and a commitment to progress is essential for motivating collaboration and structuring social cohesion.

On the other hand, citizens do not always benefit equally from the emergence of innovative practices. In some cases, the limited availability or high price of new technology facilitates hierarchical practices with painful exclusionary costs. In this context, calls for justice are often framed in terms of demands for better access and usability. Other instances of disenfranchisement, however, contain greater subtlety. In these cases, efforts to promote justice occur over long periods of time and begin with the laborious process of clarifying hidden harms.

Furthermore, as the history of unintended consequences demonstrates, technological change rarely follows the patterns of development that designers anticipate. Sometimes, technological use engenders new problems that are so complex that cost–benefit assessment cannot be used as an uncontested standard for determining whether progress has been achieved. In light of this history, judgments about whether innovation generally ameliorates pervasive social ills or ushers in disaster remain bounded by seemingly ineliminable ambiguity.

Finally, while modern market economies depend upon constant consumption, and secure this dependency by promoting the idea that the happiness can be obtained by purchasing new devices, empirical studies of the hedonic treadmill point to the opposite conclusion. The increase in satisfaction that new technology provides is, at best, temporary. Above a fairly minimal threshold, innovation does not enhance overall levels of well-being.

"Technology and Culture" is a contribution that addresses the problem of alienation – a problem that has long been the Achilles heel of technology advocates. For example, Martin Heidegger worried that modern technical activity is, at bottom, an attempt to master nature. If Heidegger is right, then it would seem that modern tools and techniques are designed in such a way as routinely to foster practices that adversely impact the environment. From this perspective, the very idea of "green technology" would be an oxymoron. Contrary to the technocratic hope of relying upon innovation to pave the way for a more sustainable future, people like Heidegger view a shift in ontological orientation as a prerequisite for saving the planet from destruction. To take another powerful example in which alienation is an issue, we need only consider how cultural conservatives somewhat ironically appropriate one of Karl Marx's early insights. Modern technology's capacity to remake nature has enabled developed countries to refashion their worlds in thoroughly artificial ways that challenge both natural and traditional approaches to dealing with other people. From the conservative perspective, innovation (especially in the domains of communication and transportation technology) erodes the fabric of traditional civility because it undermines tradition.

The discussion of André Leroi-Gourhan's central ideas in "Technology and Culture" clarifies why traditional concerns about alienation can be understood as poorly framed problems. For Leroi-Gourhan, such poor framing comes from two sources. The first source is reductive theories that view culture as arising from a material base in a wholly determinate manner. The second source is reductive theories that view culture as the end result of rational minds devising plans for transcending nature. At the heart of Leroi-Gourhan's conception of technology are ideas about general anthropology and invariant uses of technology to accomplish the goal of "exteriorization" that challenge the theoretical prejudices just listed. These ideas: (1) clarify why traditional conceptions

of technology-induced alienation are themselves artifacts of an impoverished theoretical imagination, and (2) detail why contemporary social scientific trends of rejecting evolutionism and raising the status of cultural relativism to a dogma impede our capacity to understand how cultural change occurs.

Ultimately, the review of Leroi-Gourhan's ideas is not offered as a means of justifying a particular political agenda. Rather, readers are presented with these ideas as a corrective that remedies mistaken conceptions of how technology and culture relate. In this sense, the reader is exposed to arguably more accurate conceptions of how real political change occurs and why certain political anxieties about technology are given more credit than they deserve.

"Technology and Power" makes the case that, because our species is competitive and inventive by nature, technology and power co-evolve synergistically.

- 1. Technology augments the human ability to exert control over people, places, and things.
- 2. Technology influences the ever-expanding goals that humans select as worth trying to gain control over.
- 3. Technology transforms how both individuals and collectives understand their comparative worth.

While these patterns of change are invariant, a noticeable historical shift, one that lies at the center of contemporary debates about globalization, began to occur hundreds of years ago. Whereas innovation once had a geographically and temporally erratic character – even with trade and knowledge transfer being long-standing features of human interaction – over time it has taken on an accelerated and markedly cosmopolitan form. Given the current interdependencies entailed by technologically mediated labor and trade practices, migration patterns (both short and long term) and geographically dispersed environmental pollution, the traditional notion of the "nation-state" may no longer be viable. With its demise go long-standing conceptions of how technology can be best put in the service of military and economic power.

Moreover, as the recent US "War on Terror" demonstrates, advances in technological resources cannot be equated *a priori* with political might. The strategies of resistance displayed in Iraq against US intervention show: high-tech military technology can be disrupted by local environmental conditions; religious conviction can enable low-tech weapons to be used to yield high causalities; and democracy cannot be relied on to neutralize historical and cultural influences. Given the complexities just outlined, it seems that the traditional distinction between "knowledge" and "wisdom" remains valid. Despite increasing knowledge of how to make powerful technologies, we still lack the wisdom to recognize how best to apply our creations.

"Technology and Globalization," "Technology Transfer" and "Technology and Capitalism" are inter-related entries that expand upon some of the concerns just articulated. "Technology and Globalization" clarifies some of the ways in which innovation renders spatial and temporal differences increasingly obsolete for communicative and travel purposes, and helps pave the way for what some theorists see as the emergence of cosmopolitan sensibilities. Information technology plays an especially important role in this process because it does more than speed up traditional business

practices and render them more efficient. Crucially, information technology enables new industries, types of work, management styles and financial markets to emerge – and, along with them, the introduction of new goods, services and priorities. Phrases like "knowledge workers" and the "information economy" designate the historical shift in practice and expectation that demarcate the present from material conditions associated with the Industrial Revolution.

Accompanying this change in modes of production and distribution are new political problems and new resources for political adjudication. At the international level, controversies rage over how best to regulate the manner in which workers are treated, goods are created, shared and converted to intellectual property, and toxins are contained, mitigated against and disposed. As national and global interests compete with one another, the very institutions and policies that have been constructed to deal with the ensuing conflicts, such as the World Trade Organization, find themselves objects of controversy. Even within local communities, citizens around the world find themselves increasingly polarized about jobs that are being exported to other countries and about the populations of migrant workers who are now offering services that the "information economy" has rendered "low skill."

As "Technology Transfer" clarifies, in order to grasp many of the political issues that are proving contentious in the context of contemporary globalization, it is useful to understand the fundamental ontological dimensions that structure technological experience. According to pragmatists and phenomenologists, the human experience of technological activity is both embodied and cultured. While material constraints and engineering principles are crucial components of technology, the experience of technology is shaped by background conditions that include skills, knowledge, techniques, norms and perceptions that personal and collective histories can influence. Differences in background conditions can prevent technology from being transferred successfully from one area to another. Indeed, smooth operations can become catastrophes when devices take on new meanings and functions. Ultimately, these ideas provide the basis for the crucial thesis of "technological relativity": technologies can transform into different devices through geographic and temporal circulation.

"Technology and Capitalism" provides the historical background needed fully to appreciate many of the issues detailed in the previous two entries. For, in order to grasp the complexities that link global economic activity with problems of injustice, one needs to understand the role that both technology and regulation have played in the historical shifts that mark the transitions from:

- the mercantilism of Europe that transpired during the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries,
- the first and second industrial revolutions of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries respectively,
- the development and implementation of Taylorism and Fordism that typified earlytwentieth-century practices,
- the recent activity of so-called "late capitalism."

"Energy, Technology and Geopolitics" clarifies some of the paradigmatic ways in which relations to technology and energy influence (1) the types of identities that nations adopt and (2) the routine patterns of engagement that they exhibit when conducting affairs with other countries. In this context, a summary of Huntington's taxonomic conception of geopolitical formations and types of contemporary civilizations is presented and contextualized in terms of historical energy needs and energy policies. Such analysis reveals the complex ways in which addiction to limited energy resources can – to use an appropriate metaphor – fuel economic, social and political tension.

The chapters "European Politics, Economy and Technology," "Asian Politics, Economy and Technology" and "US Politics, Economy and Technology" provide a comparative map for understanding the geoculturally distinct relations between the three crucial and repeating variables found in each title. Of particular interest is the light they shed on the following perplexing questions. Why does the US public tend to view scientific and technological innovation in a predominantly positive light, whereas Europeans often see innovation as an ambivalent phenomenon, one that gives and takes at the same time, offering the benefits of modernity and progress by threatening to undermine long-standing and valuable cultural and political traditions? Do substantive differences between US and European views on technology determine whether a given innovation will be subject to protest and skepticism? How do differences between Chinese and Indian policy reveal the flexible ways in which tensions between the urge to modernize and the desire to preserve national identity can be explored in both theory and practice?

Not only are these questions crucial to public policy; they also hold a particular significance for philosophers of technology. The early history of the philosophy of technology was replete with metaphysical characterizations of the essence of technology. These characterizations either presumed that geocultural differences are of minor consequence with respect to the matter of determining what technology most fundamentally is or they depicted the basic features of technology in geoculturally specific terms through a misleading rhetoric that gave their accounts the appearance of transcending localized ideals. In light of the complex cultural differences that these three chapters reveal, it becomes clear that the early philosophical approaches to technology are no longer viable.

In "Technology Management" we gain additional insight into the merits of using a comparative approach to analyzing technology. Notably, the concept of "technology management" is clarified through general discussion of its defining features, and emphasis is placed upon similarities and differences between US and Chinese approaches to the issue. The complex patterns that conceptually link organizational and governmental decisions concerning technology are developed further in "Technology Strategy." Here, discussions of successful and unsuccessful partnerships between China and Germany prove exceptionally illustrative.

Through emphasis upon the following issues, "The Politics of Gender and Technology" brings the virtue of comparative analysis to bear on the topic of how technology and gender mutually influence one another. Because certain technologies are perceived as masculine and others as feminine, artifacts have been used to maintain as well as challenge expectations about gender roles and definitions. Additionally, conceptions of gender have also helped determine who gets to design a new technology. Moreover, gender stereotypes have influenced the manner in which technologies

#### evan selinger

are designed – that is, tastes and patterns of behavior associated with gender have factored into decisions about aesthetics and function. And, since certain professions are associated with distinct technologies, gendered stereotypes about those technologies have impacted the extent to which men and women participate in those professions and affected how they are treated once embedded in the correlative professional norms.
