---
images: []
order: 187
title: DANIEL SAREWITZ
---

Among those who have given serious consideration to the idea of progress, virtually every conceivable position has been staked out: from the inevitability of progress to its impossibility; from its invention as a modern ideal to its persistence throughout history; from its embodiment in scientific truth-seeking, technological advance, moral improvement, or the amelioration of human suffering, to its social construction as nothing more than a contextual illusion that justifies particular ways of being and acting.1 This diversity of perspectives reflects two attributes of the idea of progress. The first is that all human action is in some sense guided by an expectation of progress toward the intended goal of that action. The second is that these goals or endpoints of progress are themselves the subject of disagreement.

Ideas of progress address three types of non-trivial goals or endpoints. The first is truth, as approached by religious insight, philosophical reasoning, or scientific inquiry. The second is the variety of normative ideals whose achievement, even if partial, may be said to constitute an improvement of the human condition. These ideals encompass notions of both individual virtue and accomplishment (generosity, tolerance, piety, selfactualization, etc.), and measures of collective good (social justice, freedom, equality, etc.). The third type of goal pertains to concrete, specifiable outcomes toward which progress can be measured using context-independent, and thus typically quantitative, metrics – for example reduced human suffering from disease morbidity and premature mortality.

For each of these categories, disagreement arises over definitions of the goals toward which effort should be directed, over the proper means of pursuing progress toward those goals, and over determination and interpretation of the metrics by which progress toward the goals can be assessed, including timescales. Any assertion of progress (or its lack), therefore, is incoherent without an accompanying statement of beliefs and assumptions about how the goals of progress are recognized and how distance from those goals is evaluated.

Science and technology, however, have seemed to offer a stable frame of reference from which directional change – progress – could be recognized and measured. The idea that science makes progress toward truth has been a powerful, widely shared notion in Western societies since the Enlightenment. This power has reflected not an abstract commitment to the ennobling value of truth, but the notion that the acquisition of more scientific truth leads to more human well-being by enabling action in the world that is both morally defensible (because it is based on truth) and practically effective (because it is based on reliable knowledge about nature). The coherence of this idea of progress, however, can no longer be sustained – owing not so much to the insights of philosophers and historians about the contingent nature of science and truth as to the very success of science itself in continually generating new insight into the intricacies and complexities of the world. For, just as science yields new facts, it simultaneously expands the realm of the unknown and in turn continually casts doubt on, and raises questions about, the meaning of those facts that it has already created.

The most fundamental truths generated by science, sometimes called "laws of nature," actually describe phenomena that can be observed only in the controlled environment of laboratories, experiments and engineered artifacts. Such laws do not have reliably predictive power in the complex and uncontrolled world of human affairs, and are likely as not to mislead if applied as "truth" to guide human action.2 When science is applied to the understanding and guidance of human affairs, its results – while often useful – are contextual, contingent and ephemeral. Weather forecasts, disease diagnoses and economic models, for example, represent – at best – a very weak notion of truth, and are better-understood as heuristics whose effectiveness depends as much on social institutions and human judgment as on scientific truth.3 In total, scientific claims of truth-making are strongest when the truths themselves are the most divorced from realworld contexts. The idea of scientific progress toward ultimate truth must therefore largely be relegated to the domain of philosophical abstraction.

Scientific truth does make itself strongly felt in human affairs – not as truth *qua* truth, but through its embodiment in technology. Technologies work because they take advantage of the predictability and reliability of controlled physical, chemical and biological phenomena. But they need not depend on an understanding of the underlying truths – only on the necessity that such truths actually exist. The special claim on progress that can be made on technology's behalf is one of directionality, accumulation and effectiveness. Technology's evolution through time moves away from simplicity, transparency, closedness and discreteness toward complexity, inaccessibility, ubiquity, interconnectedness. Because technology embodies reliable action in the world – rather than reliable knowledge as an abstraction or a rarified phenomenon of the laboratory experiment, as is the case for science – those who can link what a technology or technological system does to their own interests may reasonably say that their ability to pursue their desired goals or endpoints has improved: they can make a reasonable, if parochial, claim to progress. When such claims are strongly tied to uncontested and widely distributed increases in human well-being – as, for example, with indoor plumbing, more productive crop varieties, obstetric forceps, childhood vaccines, and antibiotics – it would be churlish to deny some directional betterment of the human condition, some progress, for those who have gained access to such artifacts.

The case for technological progress is more complex, however, than the simple accretion of artifacts that are individually deployed for human betterment. For one thing, in modern technological societies, most new technologies are not aimed directly at overcoming important obstacles to an improved quality of life. Rather, they aim at expanding economic productivity, competitiveness and consumer choice, and in so doing catalyze the creation of new wealth that in turn allows proliferation of, and access

to, new technologies among ever greater numbers of people. Economic growth thus becomes a proxy for progress. Within the resulting affluent and technology-saturated societies, it becomes impossible in most cases to isolate simple cause–effect relations between any given technology and human betterment. For example, the best predictor of good human health in affluent countries is not access to the latest medical knowledge and technologies but a range of social determinants including education level and standard of living.4 Moreover, technological change always creates losers as well as winners, for example those whose jobs and skills are displaced by machines with enhanced functionality and autonomy. Progress for some is erosion for others. We are back to disagreement.

The idea of technological progress is also confounded by the complexities that accompany technological change. While technologies are intended to solve particular problems within a restricted context, almost any widely adopted technology will have consequences, unintended and sometimes undesirable, outside that context. Automobiles (and the technological infrastructure that they require and enable) are an obvious example, on the one hand allowing a quantum increase in autonomous human mobility, but on the other contributing to transformation of domains as disparate as the social fabric of communities and the chemistry and physics of the atmosphere. Similarly, the huge benefits of antibiotics are now being undermined by the looming threat of antibiotic-resistant infections. One might even observe that nuclear weapons, which have brought to humans the capacity to annihilate their own societies, were in fact a strong stabilizing force in the second half of the twentieth century that arguably led to radically reduced loss of life from organized, international violence following the carnage of two world wars.5

Yet the point that technological change leads to consequences both good and bad is obvious and trivial. The deeper point is that, while the intent of all technologies is to exercise more certain and reliable control over some circumscribed facet of reality, the cumulative effect of more technology continually being integrated into complex human and natural systems is the creation of more complexity and contingency in the world. Just as science in its production of knowledge creates new realms of the unknown, so does technology in its exercise of local control open new terrains of unreliability and unpredictability.

Thus, three centuries of continual expansion of scientific knowledge and technological capability do not add up to a concomitant increase in the capacity accurately to predict the future of human affairs. This should be surprising because the proliferation of reliable scientific knowledge and reliable technological control might reasonably be expected to create a growing capacity to, on the one hand, characterize and, on the other, create desired future outcomes. The problem is that the social–natural systems in which science and technology act are unbounded (at least relative to our capacity to understand and to act), so knowledge and consequences radiate and interact in ways that cannot possibly be anticipated.

Predictability, or its absence, is central to the idea of progress because statements about progress are necessarily informed not just by comparison with the past (itself a contentious enough task) but with expectations for the future as well. There is something that sounds very much like directional change in the fact that today people can, with considerable reliability, manage information and communication networks that span the globe, an electric utility grid for a city of 10 million people, or a global agricultural system that produces sufficient food for 6 billion people (distributional problems aside) – capabilities that were literally unthinkable as recently as half a century ago, and that were acquired incrementally and cumulatively over time. Yet it was precisely the acquired ability to manage reliably a complex global air transport system that created the technical conditions that allowed the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, themselves the stimuli for complex subsequent geopolitical events. So, are technological trends extendable into the indefinite future, or do they bring society closer to cascading disasters caused by, say, cultural conflict, environmental collapse, or a combination of both? Is technological society a sturdy edifice or a house of cards? Ideas of scientific and technological progress are strongly influenced by expectations of the future that must always have a considerable irrational component.

The idea of progress thus carries with it an inherent contestability. And yet, in a sense that is at once definitional and tautological, a commitment to progress is also bound up in all human action. Human decisions, at the individual or collective level, are made to achieve an aim, and thus they predict a state that the decision-maker desires to achieve. It is true that the outcomes of decisions are often different from those that were intended or desired, but this does not alter the logical reality that the intent of decisions is to make progress toward a goal via the action that the decision initiates. Notions of agency and ascertainable cause-and-effect relations, which lie at the core of modernity, are thus logically tied up with commitments to progress.

Indeed, the idea of progress is essential to the sustainability of modern hightechnology, market-oriented societies. Political stability in such societies appears to be strongly dependent on a continual process of wealth creation which in turn is made possible by continual technological innovation and, crucially, continual societal adoption of the products of that innovation. Yet people do not use new technologies as part of some social contract to help create new wealth and civil stability; they use them because they believe they will somehow improve their life. The avid consumption of the products of innovation is a statement of belief in progress.

The result of this belief is a continual remaking of the appearance, mechanics and dynamics of daily existence, from the way people enjoy music to the way they eat and work and fight wars and have sex. Finally, then, even within the restricted context of affluent societies with their implicit commitment to technological change, the idea of progress must encounter how such change actually makes people feel. The data on this subject are strong and unambiguous: within affluent nations, people's level of subjective well-being, of how they perceive their own quality of life, is remarkably stable, unperturbed by rapid technological change and accumulating wealth.6 In other words, the data – measured in surveys from many countries over several decades – demonstrate that people don't like living in the latest version of the world any more (or less) than they liked living in previous ones. Levels of happiness, satisfaction and wellness, it turns out, are coupled to technological change and economic growth only via the commitment to pursuing a more satisfying future that never arrives. Yet, if society gave up on technological consumption as the road to a better life, then the centrifugal force that holds modern market economies together would dissipate. The idea of progress is thus essential to social cohesion in modern societies; the reality of progress will always, however, remain a contested and elusive domain of the human imagination.

#### Notes

- 1. For example, see: R. Nisbet, *The Idea of Progress* (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers, 1980/1998); C. Lasch, *The True and Only Heaven: Progress and Its Critics* (New York: W. W. Norton, 1991); and *Daedalus, Journal of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences*, special issue *On Progress*, Summer 2004.
- 2. e.g. N. Cartwright, *The Dappled World: A Study of the Boundaries of Science* (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
- 3. D. Sarewitz, R. A. Pielke, Jr, and R. A. Byerly, Jr (eds), *Prediction: Science, Decision Making, and the Future of Nature* (Covelo, Calif.: Island Press, 2000).
- 4. e.g. R. Evans, M. Barer and T. Marmor, *Why Are Some People Healthy and Others Not: The Determinants of Health of Populations* (New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1994).
- 5. R. Rhodes, R., "Technology and Death," in A. Lightman, D. Sarewitz and C. Desser (eds), *Living with the Genie: Essays on Technology and the Quest for Human Mastery* (Covelo, Calif.: Island Press, 2003), pp. 129–38.
- 6. e.g. E. Deiner and E. Suh, *Subjective Well-Being across Cultures* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000).
