---
images: []
order: 190
title: DANIEL SAREWITZ
---

Power is the projection of human intent over other people, animals or things. Technology magnifies intent and makes it more reliable. If we say that an artist has power over his medium, we mean that the artist successfully translates creativity and virtuosity to the work of art via a technology such as brush, sculpting tool or camera. Yet the artifact of the camera clearly embodies more of the artist's power than the brush or the tool. Michelangelo spoke metaphorically in saying that in producing his sculptures he was merely liberating the form that resided in the block of marble. For the photographer, however, the metaphor becomes reality; the image actually does reside in the camera. This increased taking on of the essence of power by the technology tells us less about the skill of the artist than about the capacity of the technology to translate the skill of a practitioner into something that could not exist without it – to expand the realm of plausible intent. Thus, a longbowman provides both skill and power in launching an arrow toward its intended mark perhaps – if the bowman has great skill – a hundred meters away. A technician on a missile cruiser presses a button and launches a computer-guided cruise missile that strikes a five-foot-wide target a hundred (or a thousand) miles away. In the case of the sculptor compared to the photographer, and the bowman compared to the sailor, more of the cause-and-effect connecting intent to power is embodied in the technology, though all these practitioners may require a high degree of skill to fulfill their intent.

Politically and militarily dominant societies have almost always been those that have chosen to take seriously the pursuit of technological advantage. Indeed, history can be told as a story of evolving technology applied to the exercise of power. David's slingshot, the Trojan Horse, the longbows of Agincourt, British ships-of-the-line, the tanks of the Blitzkrieg, and the A-bomb at Hiroshima are the mythically familiar instantiations of the relation of technology and power. Of course, technology has also been applied to the exercise of power through means that are not explicitly military, such as superior modes of transportation, communication and information dissemination, production of goods, and production of energy for doing various kinds of work more efficiently. Yet advances in these realms have also often supported the exercise of martial power.

Power and technology grow together; they co-evolve. The competitive nature of humans and societies, and the incremental essence of technological innovation feed back on each other and are mutually enhancing. That is, the quest for power is inherently served through the adoption and improvement of technologies that can increasingly embody that power. Throughout much of history this feedback process was temporally spasmodic and geographically specific; over the past several centuries it has become rapid, continual and increasingly cosmopolitan.

Military power and economic power are especially closely tied together through the role of technology. Historically, superior technology in arms and transport allowed the geographic projection of military and political power that in turn catalyzed economic power largely via control of natural resources (ore; arable land; spices) and trade routes, as exemplified by the far-flung European colonies, and Chinese colonies before that. But industrialism – the apparently limitless indigenous wealth-creating capacity created by the application of technological innovation to production of goods and services – has amplified and accelerated the synergies between military and economic power. This interdependence reached its most conspicuous high point in the Cold War, during which the United States and the Soviet Union (as well as their respective allies) invested significant proportions of their wealth in the development of both military and non-military technologies as part of a competition for global military and economic supremacy. The obvious product of this competition was the arsenal of increasingly powerful and accurate nuclear weapons capable of destroying the world many hundreds of times over. But transformational advances in computing and information technologies, materials, communications, biotechnologies, and avionics and aeronautics were also products of the Cold War and the linking, both direct and indirect, of military and non-military technological innovation processes. For example, the utter pervasiveness of computers in society today is an outgrowth of evolving networks of government military, private-sector industrial, and academic research institutions that were knitted together during the Cold War and which could simultaneously serve goals of national defense, wealth generation, and knowledge creation. Indeed, the more rapid, pervasive and all-encompassing technological change enabled in the West through linking innovation to competitive economic markets was arguably a key element in the West's Cold War victory – a victory that was achieved, needless to say, without actually employing the weaponry the devastating power of which was the symbolic technological product of that contest.

The Cold War, that is, ought to have made completely clear the reality that power in its military, political, economic and cultural guises, while intimately related, are not the same things, and that the successful linking of technology to power in one of these realms does not automatically confer dominance in the others.

Yet deep confusion about technology and power remains a key attribute of world affairs, and is on conspicuous display in the ongoing war in Iraq. The United States, owing to its absolute supremacy in military technology, vanquished the Iraqi army in short order and with few US casualties. But the subsequent "mission accomplished" pronouncement by US president George W. Bush, standing on the deck of an aircraft carrier – itself a palpable symbol of the wedding of power and technology – can now be understood as an inadvertent testimony to the limits of the technology–power nexus. The proximal objectives enabled by a technology – killing a soldier or destroying a building, for example – say little if anything about the power of that technology

#### daniel sarewitz

to facilitate broader outcomes – the compliance of one society to the will of another, for example.

Technology and power are inextricably linked to each other through the competitive and inventive nature of the human species. This synergistic essence seems not, however, to be matched by an evolving wisdom as to the proper and effective application of technologically enabled power in human affairs.
