---
images: []
order: 194
title: What Is Technology Management/Management of Technology (MOT)?
---

Technology management can be viewed from many different perspectives since the word "technology" itself is subject to various interpretations. However, the author of this thesis approaches the topics from different experiences that are associated with different environments and backgrounds. It is hoped that this thesis will present the many facets of technology management. The two words "management" and "technology" not only carry the burden of many different meanings but also present additional sophistication owing to the anthropological diversity. To many, MOT means managing engineering and technology. To others, MOT indicates managing knowledge and information, managing research and development, managing manufacture and operation, managing the activities of engineers and scientists, or managing the functional activities without concern for the total of activities that encompass the businessconcepts-to-commercialization process. According to Gaynor (1996), these interrelated activities must be integrated into a technology system. MOT means not only managing the system but also managing the pieces, which involves integrating the "pieces" into an acceptable "whole" by focusing attention on the interdependence of the pieces. However, these elaborations are only part of the process of MOT by this thesis.

According to the 1987 workshop report of the National Research Council (NRC) of the USA, "Management of Technology" is the hidden competitive advantage bridging "the knowledge and practice gap" between science, engineering and business management (Khalil 2001). Management of Technology (MOT) as a field links "engineering, science, and management disciplines to plan, develop, implement technological capabilities to shape and accomplish the strategic and operational objectives of an organisation." The NRC report summarizes important contributions to industry that management of technology knowledge can make as follows:

How to integrate technology into the overall strategic objectives of organization; How to get into and out of technologies faster and more efficiently; How to assess/evaluate technology more efficiently;

How best to accomplish technology transfer;

How to reduce new product development time;

How to manage large, complex and inter-disciplinary or inter-organizational projects/ systems;

How to manage the organization's internal use of technology;

How to leverage the effectiveness of technical professionals

To put it in a simple way, technology management is about getting people and technologies working together to do what people are expecting, which is a collection of systematic methods for managing the process of applying knowledge to extend the human activities and produce defined products. Effective technology management synthesizes the best ideas from all sides: academic, practitioner, generalist or technologist.

### Significance of Technology Management

It is argued that there are three major factors strategically in modern organizations that underpin the creation of competitive advantages. The first of these is strategic leadership. The effective leadership ensures that the enterprise will develop itself in the right direction and the production of product will meet the demand of the market. The second factor is having a staff with motivation and empowerment. They are the driving forces of the organization. The third factor is the proper management of technology. It is important that the company's technology be appropriately and properly managed so as to achieve effective and competitive status (Harrison and Samson 2003).

Leadership and motivation of employees have been widely recognized as success factors. There have been significant additions to theories and practice regarding improvement in the management of people. Therefore, strategically, the remaining battlefield being competitive depends on proper management of technology. To put it differently, the strategic issue will be how a company could develop, acquire, share and manage technology appropriately and effectively.

It is interesting that this argument has been in congruence with the American historical experience. The United States of America experienced an increasing global competition which resulted in loss of market share in several industry sectors in the 1970s and 1980s. This became a concern not only to industries but also to government and educational interests. To identify reasons for the decline in US industrial competitiveness, and to formulate a response to the challenges within global competition, serious work and efforts had been contributed in the search for explanations and solutions. Discussions were initiated by major establishments such as the National Research Council (NRC), the National Science Foundation (NSF), the American Association of Engineering Societies, the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology, the American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business, Oak Ridge Associated Universities and others. A series of workshops were organized and attended by experts for the discussion of changing paradigms in business and technology (Khalil and Bayraktar 1988). A resulting consensus was that great attention and a significant amount of effort should be directed toward making improvements in the management of technology and in conducting research and developing educational programs in this emerging field of knowledge.

Khalil (2001) highlights that efforts to improve the US position in the global economy were being influenced by the understanding that more organizations, including government agencies, higher educational institutions, enterprises and founding agencies become aware of issues involved in the international arena. Today, rapid changes in the technology and business environment continue to occur. These changes require continuous updating of methods and techniques of business practice. For example, measuring the value of a business according to assessment of physical assets or based on traditional accounting or finance formulas is inadequate in the knowledge economy. Education and training institutions need to take into consideration the changing environment in technology and business, and respond by changing their programs accordingly. Khalil (2001) argues that international business and engineering schools need to give consideration to incorporating into their curricula educational modules recognizing the importance of the knowledge era and the technology revolution. The intangible assets such as intellectual capital, intellectual properties, service innovation, information technology and many of today's rapidly growing arenas should be recognized. Furthermore, many of the existing models and the traditional programs need to take into account the appropriateness and effectiveness of technology and innovation as well as the volatilities of the environment in which the technology is created and applied.

In addition, in the twenty-first century, technology assumes great importance in advancing every aspect of human endeavor. MOT assumes even greater importance in the capacity-building of countries, companies and individuals to embrace technological changes in order to advance their competitive status in a global marketplace. It has been recognized that interest in the field of management of technology has mushroomed since the inception of the movement to introduce MOT as a new field of study and research in the 1980s. The application of MOT principles has made a significant impact on the wealth-creation ability of the US and a large number of other countries.
