---
images: []
order: 197
title: Preamble
---

Technology strategy is no doubt an important but often ignored link in the strategic formulation system. Compared with the position of development and marketing strategy, technology strategy appears to be in a fragmented, piecemeal fashion. However, it has been hoped that this thesis addresses the significance of technology strategy in the process of the creation of competitive advantage and highlights the crucial issues concerning technology strategy, such as the definition, brief history, features, principles, processes and steps of formulation of technology strategy.

A strategy of a nation is a means by which the internal strengths and weaknesses are linked with the opportunities and threats provided by its environment. Technologies by themselves do not establish the overall strengths of a nation. However, the appropriate and effective technology strategy is a key component and driving force in attaining competitive advantage. By integrating proper technology strategy into its overall strategy, a nation can develop a well-defined technology policy toward technology development and innovation (De 2004).

Technology strategy is a relatively recent concept in the area of technology management. After the Second World War, firms in the US such as Westinghouse and General Electric pursued paths of diversification through internal research and development (R&D) efforts (Narayanan 2001). Though the concept of technology strategy was not prevalent at that time, the origin of the concept can be traced to the R&D activities and the argument about technology strategy adopted to manage R&D in large diversified firms.

Porter (1988) describes "technological strategy" as "a vehicle for pursuing generic competitive strategies aiming at fundamentally different types of competitive advantages" in trying to establish a conceptual link between technological change and the choice of competitive strategy by the individual firm. He further elaborates that technological strategy must be a broader concept of overall competitive strategy, which is an integrated set of policies in each functional activity of the firm that aims to create a sustainable competitive advantage. Technological strategy is but one element of an overall competitive strategy and thus must be consistent with and reinforced by the actions of other functional departments. Maidique and Frevola (1988) define "technological strategy" as "the pattern of choices that the firms make regarding technology direction." In their view, technological strategy addresses a distinct set of

decisions; it should be differentiated from other manufacturing strategies. Furthermore, it is concerned with choices between alternative new technologies, the manner in which they are implemented into new products and processes, and the utilization of resources that will allow their successful implementation. Rosenbloom (1993) regards "technology strategy" as "the revealed pattern in the technology choices of firms, which involve the commitment of resources for the appropriation, maintenance, deployment, and abandonment of technological capacity." These technological choices determine the character and the extent of the firms' principal technical capacities and the set of available product and process platforms.

According to Narayanan (2001), in reflection of these definitions, technology strategy should have the following features:

Technology strategy focuses on the kinds of technologies that a firm selects for acquisition, development, deployment, etc.;

Technology strategy requires commitments surrounding technology selection;

Technology strategy is not confined to high-technology industries. Even a capacitydriven or a customer-driven industry requires a technology strategy. Such strategies may be implicit and may not reflect the conscious decisions by executives, but none the less they determine the choice of the technical capacities and available product and process platforms of the firms. For example, a banking firm or a hotel in a service industry may decide to invest in information and communication technology (ICT) as a way of communicating and interfacing with their customers;

Technology strategy has to embrace both the hardware and software elements of technology. It is specially the case in these days.

With consideration of these features, therefore, there are four major types of technology strategy. These include technology leadership, niche, technology follower and technology rationalizer.

Technology leadership strategy consists of establishing and maintaining through technology development, innovation and deployment a pre-eminent position in the competitive domain in all the technologies for a dominant market position. In general, the well-developed countries often follow this strategy.

Niche strategy consists of focusing on a selected number of critical technologies to seek leadership. Technology innovation and development are selective and oriented to build technological capacity in order to create competitive advantage. For example, the newly developed countries often follow this technology strategy.

Follower strategy is often adapted by the developing countries in order to avoid the risk of basic research.

Technology rationalization involves maintaining adequately only a selected set of technologies.

Narayanan (2001) proposes that there are four steps in formulating a technology strategy. The first step consists of diagnosis, understanding the environmental context and the firm's strategic position. Second, it involves the commitment of resources to certain technology choices. Third, it has to consider the mode of implementation, intellectual property protection plans and organization for execution of the technology choices. Finally, it involves the execution of the choices and the implementation of the technology strategy.

Faced with a turbulent business environment, collaborative arrangement of technology strategy has become a trend these days. Collaborative arrangement involves two or more firms in which the partners wish to involve technology transfer and to learn from each other the technologies, skills and knowledge that are not otherwise available. The partners may range from suppliers and customers to even competitors.

One of the major features in the collaborative arrangement is knowledge transfer, which is viewed as strategically important. The collaborative arrangement is often determined because of the strategic reasons. Though partners may try to avoid competition in their day-to-day operations, however, many technology-related collaborative arrangements are actually between competitors. Take Shanghai Automobile for example. The factory once was the flagship of China's car manufacturing industry, which produced the first car in 1958. In the early years of China's economic reform, the first joint venture was established in 1991 between Shanghai Automobile and Volkswagen, which to some extent takes a leading role in China's car industry. The technology collaboration between Shanghai Automobile and Volkswagen begun in the early 1990s has brought the company into the top 500 in the world. It has been recognized that there has been close and successful collaboration between the two strategic partners. However, when Shanghai Automobile wished to create its own brand and intended to acquire core technology from its German partner this was rejected by Volkswagen. This clearly indicates that Shanghai Automobile and Volkswagen are pursuing different technology strategies.

In this thesis, we use the term "technology strategy" to describe the strategically important technology choices made by a firm or a state. It is a strategic instrument in achieving sustainable competitive advantage. Thus, the cooperation in Maglev railway in Shanghai between China and Germany is another case of collaborative arrangement of technology strategy. In 2003, the German technology of magnetic trains in Shanghai had created the fastest speed (500 kilometers per hour) on the first magnetic railway in the world. Known as the Maglev (magnetic levitation), China's flagship transport system takes eight minutes to hurtle along a 28.5 kilometer track through the paddy fields surrounding Shanghai Pudong International Airport. This journey normally takes up to one hour by car. From the point of view of technology strategy, Germany's Maglev technology was testified and made known through technology collaboration, while China has sorted out its transportation problem from Shanghai Longyang Station to Pudong International Airport. This is a so-called win–win solution. Furthermore, the Chinese government is currently considering an extension into the city and possibly further to the neighboring city of Hangzhou, in time for Shanghai's hosting of the World Expo in 2010. As the German technology being transferred to China has had a positive effect, the Maglev is now having followers across the world. According to Clark (2005), Germany wants to build one Maglev for an airport link in Munich. The US government is also evaluating Maglev schemes. More realistically, the UK government plans to build a Maglev from London to Scotland, which will cost at least £16 billion.
