---
images: []
order: 201
title: Technology and the Global Political Economy
---

Technological innovations have, in large part, fueled globalization. Innovations such as jet airplanes, wireless telephones, email, computers and global telecommunications infrastructure allow money, technology, raw materials and finished products to move freely across national borders. Information and communication technologies, however, stand out as the most important technologies driving globalization. The increasing speed of social interactions and the decreasing distances among people depend on the presence of information and communication technology. The generation and transmission of technological knowledge is also transformed by globalization, which has made the world seem smaller and more interdependent as people who were previously separated by great distances are now able to share in the same economic, political and social forms of life.

Information technology (IT) is arguably the key to the process of globalization. Innovations in computer hardware and software in the early 1990s allowed for a tremendous increase in the scale of information gathering, storage, and speed of distribution. At the same time, improvements in telecommunications technology allowed for increased access to information, creating more effective, and less expensive, means of communication. The ability to process information and communicate in digital form has driven the "IT revolution." Microprocessors, the tiny devices that power digital technologies, progressively increased their processing power and speed while becoming smaller and less expensive. Microprocessors power personal computers and computer networks, cellular telephones and communications networks, televisions, video games and visual displays, and are increasingly found in more ordinary devices, like automobiles and refrigerators. Innovations in fiber optics allowed data to be transformed into digital form, converted into impulses of light, and then transmitted at great speeds over great distances, markedly increasing the capacity of telecommunications networks. Improvements in wireless networks allowed for greater flexibility in communications and information-processing over distances. Advances in IT facilitate the transfer, storage and processing of information, and help to further the process of globalization.

IT technology has had a profound influence on globalizing business practices. The Internet, for example, has transformed the nature of exchanges between buyers and sellers, eliminating the need for face-to-face interactions, and allowing consumers more access to retailers and business to expand their market share. Businesses use the Internet for "e-commerce" to find other businesses to buy or sell their products or services. "Business-to-business" commerce streamlines the interactions between wholesalers, retailers, producers and distributors of goods within and among business enterprises. E-commerce facilitates communication and access to markets on a scale previously unrealized.

IT technology has created new industries, fostered new kinds of work, and transformed the nature of management, manufacturing, distribution and services. It has created the demand for new computer hardware and software development, technical expertise and support, information management and "knowledge workers." IT technology changes the nature of the global workforce as it eliminates the need for workers in outdated industries and demands workers with the knowledge and training required for jobs in computing and telecommunications. Changes in the nature of the workforce, away from physical work to knowledge work, in turn push the demand for high-tech workers, high-tech machinery, and the infrastructure necessary to support them. As IT-driven sectors of the economy create new service jobs and destroy old manufacturing jobs in advanced industrialized nations, the nature of economies and workforces change in developing nations as well. Part of the dynamics of IT technology and globalization is the intimate relationships now afforded by computing and telecommunication to coordinate commerce across national boundaries, creating new patterns of economic activities while eliminating others, both domestically and internationally.

IT technology is a key ingredient in "lean production," the manufacturing system that characterizes the late-capitalist ("post-Fordist") global system of production and distribution. Lean production aims at streamlining manufacturing to eliminate excesses and inefficiencies related to overproduction, inflexible design, slow product development, excessive inventory, unresponsive management, lack of information, and a host of other problems associated with Fordist mass production. IT-based inventory systems help manufacturers coordinate to reduce the time, waste and costs of production by reducing product assembly and delivery times, and by reducing product inventories held in warehouses in between the factory and retail outlets. The technique is known as "just-in-time" production, a strategy of reducing inventory before and after manufacturing in order to reduce costs, maximize profits and improve return on investment. Just-in-time improves the flow of goods by managing the segments of the supply chain in a business (what materials are used, how much, delivered when and where, for what exact purpose) co-coordinated with knowledge about the demand for a particular product. Just-in-time production depends on fast and accurate information-sharing up and down the supply chain. Late-twentieth-century developments in IT technology helped to establish lean production as a central ingredient in a global economy.

Another area profoundly impacted by information technology is financial markets. Fast, reliable information is vital for all interactions among banks, financial institutions and lenders with individuals, investors, shareholders and borrowers. Marketplace institutions have benefited from improvements in IT technology, including the stock market, bond market, futures markets, options market, foreign exchange market, to name just some among many instruments for buying, selling, borrowing, lending and investing in important segments of financial markets. IT innovations in informationprocessing speed, storage, memory, data analysis capacity, and security have allowed financial market to become international. IT innovations in information-gathering and -management allow actors separated by great distances to have information and coordinate actions based on information on a new, increasing scale. The result is a global financial market in which individuals and institutions have access to more information more rapidly than before, and greater access to previously remote banks, lenders, governments and foreign markets to invest or raise capital. The currently existing global financial market owes its existence to a combination of IT innovations and international regulatory reforms that have opened up financial markets to foreign (i.e. global) participation.
