---
images: []
order: 202
title: The Global Political Economy and Technology
---

Technology is a necessary but not sufficient condition for globalization. A variety of national and international laws, policies, practices must also be in place. The most important conditions include the dominance of capitalist markets, increasing influence of international financial markets over national policies, a decreasing influence of the State over international finance and commerce, privatization of services, deregulation of economic activities, and an increasing role of private actors and business corporations in social and economic life.

The most powerful and important organization dealing with global economic regulations among nations is the World Trade Organization (WTO). The purpose of the WTO is to provide a negotiating forum for nations to form agreements to lower trade barriers to ensure that trade flows as freely and predictably as possible. In addition to trade in goods and services, the WTO regulates banking and finance, intellectual property, dispute settlement, and trade policy reviews. For the 150 member nations, the WTO is the most influential institution of international commerce.

The WTO aims to lower trade barriers such as customs duties, import bans or quotas, as well as limits to non-tariff trade barriers that nations may implement and enforce, such as domestic laws regulating product standards and liability, environmental protections, use of tax revenues for public services, and other domestic laws regulating investment and trade. Through the WTO Dispute Settlement Process, nations can challenge each other's laws on behalf of their commercial interests if they believe barriers to trade exist. If member nations do not conform to WTO regulations, they face possible economic sanctions.

Many of the WTO agreements affect the science and technology laws and practices of member nations. The Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures Agreement (SPS) sets food safety and animal and plant health standards, including quarantine, inspections, and testing requirements. The aim of the SPS Agreement is to establish standards based on accepted science to allow countries to set reasonable health and safety regulations but only to the extent necessary to protect human, plant, or animal life or health. The SPS agreement prevents countries from using higher sanitary and phytosanitary measures in order to protect domestic producers. The result is an enforceable procedure for establishing global health standards and acceptable scientific practice.

The Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) ensures that product standards, regulations, testing and certification on all goods, including industrial and agricultural products, do not become obstacles to trade. The TBT Agreement sets limits on the standards governments may enforce to achieve social, environmental, consumer, or public health objectives. The aim is to prevent national technical regulations and industrial standards from being used for protectionism and instead to foster the development of singular, globally accepted regulations and standards.

The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPs) establishes the levels of protection governments have to give the intellectual property rights of other governments. The agreement covers copyright, trademarks, geographical indications, industrial designs, patents, trade secrets, and integrated circuit layout designs. TRIPs extends intellectual property rights to include pharmaceuticals, plant varieties, human and plant cell lines, micro-organisms, and genes. The agreement defines what counts as intellectual property, how governments should enforce rights, and how to settle disputes over rights between member nations. Through these agreements and others, the WTO functions as the single most important institution enabling the globalization of science and technology practice.

Proponents of the WTO and economic globalization maintain that lowering import tariffs and "harmonizing" the international rules of commerce will make trade more competitive and more beneficial for all nations, especially less developed nations. Opponents worry that its agreements privilege private corporate and financial interest goals over public interest goals of sovereign nations. As a result, the process of globalization tends less toward positive "harmonization" of international policies and more toward negative "homogenization" of regional cultural and environmental differences that are sacrificed for the sake of free trade in goods, services and investment. Other theorists believe that the impact of globalization is greatly exaggerated and that most of the world's population remains immune from technological innovations and international economic institutions and financial markets. Despite the controversies surrounding globalization, there is widespread agreement that the combination of new technologies and the expansion of financial and economic markets is challenging local and national boundaries with far-reaching implications for humanity.
