---
images: []
order: 205
title: EVAN SELINGER
---

The phrase "technology transfer" has multiple meanings. The two dominant uses concern anticipatory thinking: one refers to employees working in offices of technology transfer who attend to patenting and licensing inventions so that new scientific discoveries can be transformed into technological applications; the other refers to people working on development projects who try to discern and implement new applications for technologies that already exist.

Given the enthusiasm for accelerating the pace of technological progress in developing countries, it is the latter endeavor – particularly when designed to assist impoverished regions to "leapfrog" from a pre-modern milieu into the digital age – that is at the forefront of many private and public programs.

Even when well intentioned and carefully orchestrated, the use of technology transfer as a development tool routinely provokes international critique in addition to praise. This is because the standards for judging regional success and the feasibility for expansion through replication are subject to debate – debate that typically contains ontological, ethical and political dimensions.

In order to understand the central motifs around which many of the debates revolve, it will be useful first to discuss how to understand technology transfer *qua* practice. Owing to anthropological diversity, the thesis of technological relativity holds the key to this endeavor. According to this thesis – expressed by pragmatists such as John Dewey and phenomenologists such as Don Ihde – technological activity is an embodied experience that has ineliminable cultural dimensions. Not only does the scope of technology include machines, artifacts and engineering principals; it also extends to background conditions, including skills, knowledge, techniques, social norms, and perceptions that are shaped by personal and collective histories. In short, without the regulating structure of practice, artifacts and machines would simply be useless junk – or, at best, material entities that could, some day, potentially become technologies. Indeed, even the effective use of "found" or "proto" technologies, such as the tubes of grass that chimps use to coax insects out of the ground, requires users to possess viable techniques – and these techniques, in turn, are typically acquired through the disciplining of natural talent through habituation.

When it comes to importing a new technology, some simple contexts, such as eating and drinking, are widespread; as a consequence, they often transfer easily. Other contexts, however, are more complex; in these cases, technology transfer can prove difficult. In some instances, technologies that a particular culture finds useful cannot be transferred at all; here, differences in background conditions tend to be at the root of the discrepancy. For example, as Hubert Dreyfus notes, it would be difficult to imagine, given the way material culture embodies and shapes cultural identity, a traditional Japanese tea ceremony occurring around Styrofoam cups. Styrofoam cups are not aesthetically pleasing; and their primary function, managing temperature efficiently, is achieved in a disposable and interchangeable form. By contrast, "the tea cup does not preserve temperature as well as its plastic replacement, and it has to be washed and protected, but it is preserved from generation to generation for its beauty and social meaning."

Cases like the latter suggest that, when it comes to understanding and assessing technology transfer, categories such as "cultural specificity" are likely to be more relevant than what often turn out to be primarily ergonomic matters of "simplicity" and "complexity." Since a transferable technology can count as being adopted only once its components are instantiated into cultural practices through "integration" as well as "translation," new agendas and novel usage can always turn a given artifact, machine, and even system into a different "being."

Two examples of technology transfer can prove illustrative here. First, consider the widespread use of text-messaging. It may be tempting to imagine that this trend has become ubiquitous owing to universal proclivities. Perhaps it is human nature to want to avoid genuine intimacy while simultaneously generating the illusion of intersubjective bonding. But, in addition to being culturally insensitive, such grand speculation would be difficult, if not impossible to prove.

In order to explain the popularity of text-messaging in China, for example, one would need to examine how the prospect of leaving a text-message accords with or challenges extant perceptions of hierarchical behavior. For example, it has been alleged that, owing to traditional values, many people in China view text-messaging as a communicative act that can preserve dignity. This is because they consider it rude to leave voice-mail messages, and they further view the prospect of conversing with an intended recipient's assistant to be undignified. Thus, while text-messaging may be primarily a general technology of idle chatter or emergency contact in one cultural context, it can be primarily a dignity-preserving technology in another.

The second example to consider is the Village Phone Program. Created under the auspices of the Grameen Bank in 1997, this endeavor uses micro-credit principals to loan Bangladeshi women money for acquiring mobile phones that can be rented out to villagers on a call-by-call basis. This program has already made it possible for women living in a predominantly Muslim and explicitly patriarchal society to gain new levels of income, respect and geographic mobility. It has also enabled the mostly illiterate Bangladeshis to acquire improved "connectivity" that, in turn, has helped merchants of all sorts conduct more efficient and informed business transactions, helped people stay in touch with relatives who moved abroad (primarily to acquire employment), and helped people improve their access to medical advice and medical treatment. As a consequence of these gains, neo-classical economists typically characterize the project as producing "empowered" and, comparatively speaking, "independent" agents. Indeed, if such a description were unproblematic, the Village Phone Program would

deserve unqualified praise for effectively promoting two of the United Nations Millennium Goals: combating extreme poverty and promoting gender equality through the empowerment of women. And, even if the Village Phone Program is more complicated than the dominant development narratives acknowledge, it still makes sense to characterize mobile phones as "weapons against poverty" in this context, but not in others. Again, the critical point here is that culturally specific reasons explain why mobile phones have become development tools in Bangladesh but not in US slums and ghettos.

Having briefly detailed the relativistic dimension of technology transfer, it will be useful to discuss some of the leading ethical and political issues. For the sake of continuity, Bangladesh and China will again be used as paradigm cases.

With respect to the transfer of chemicals, nuclear power and biotechnology, one of the central problems that developing countries have faced is *contextual insensitivity* on the part of the developers. One illustrative case is discussed by Bill McKibben in *Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age* (2000). There he analyzes the impact of the 1960s Green Revolution in Gorasin, Bangladesh, judging the project to be an instance of Western *hubris*.

At the program's inception, compliance was achieved by informing the Bangladeshis that, if they imported new high-yield rice strains produced in "Western labs," progress would be made in combating the rampant hunger problem; indeed, the predicted outcome was abundant and consistent food sources. What the developers did not sufficiently consider, however, is that Bangladesh is "as much water as it is land" and also experiences floods regularly. As a consequence, by planting more " 'improved' seeds instead of dozens of different varieties," the inhabitants of Gorasin would come to acquire an increased need for pesticides, and people as well as animals were exposed to dangerous toxins.

Because the women who collected water for the village came into direct contact with harmful chemicals, they developed gastric and skin problems. The cows and fish became diseased as well – and this proved to be a significant blow to Bengali diet and cultural identity. In order to prevent further devastation, it was decided that the high-tech agenda needed to be revisited. In McKibben's parlance, the Bangladeshis said "enough" to a technology that could not be successfully integrated into their local norms. About a decade ago they imported low-tech organic farming zones in the hope of moving toward a more sustainable solution. The general lesson that McKibben draws from thinking about Gorasin is that the very pursuit of a developmental goal (e.g. improving health) can, ironically, inhibit that goal (e.g. fostering disease). Since comparable examples of dramatic and unforeseen results arising from technology transfer abound, the task of creating an empirically sensitive development ethics, one that deals appropriately with both techno-scientific uncertainty and multi-cultural sensitivity, remains an important priority.

On the more explicitly political side of the spectrum, human rights issues are also taking center stage in current discussions about technology transfer. While some of the paradigm cases concern the techno-economic erosion of indigenous values, others emphasize a problem at the other end of the political spectrum. In these instances, critics are concerned about techno-economic forces entrenching unjust local norms.

For example, Microsoft's decision in early 2006 to shut down the MSN Spaces website of a popular Beijing journalist – Zhao Jing (alias Michael Anti) – became mired

#### evan selinger

in controversy. Chinese censors were concerned about the subversive content that was being displayed on his blog; and Microsoft, in turn, responded by touting a corporate ethos that emphasized client autonomy and cultural relativism. Brook Richardson, a group product manager at MSN, noted that Microsoft and other multinational companies are obligated to ensure that their "products and services comply with local laws, norms, and industry practices." Because such policy is being enacted during a time in which China already exhibits strict – if not repressive – guidelines for Internet use, concern is being expressed that American companies may not simply be ignoring human rights violations but could, in fact, be fortifying them. Yahoo, for example, recently provided Chinese authorities with the name of an "anonymous" emailer who had disseminated an opinionated message about Tiananmen Square. As a consequence, that person is serving a ten-year prison term. Furthermore, MSN's filter for Chinese use prevents certain controversial phrases, including "Dalai Lama," "human rights," "freedom" and "democracy," from being included in prominent places, such as blog headers. In light of such evidence concerning China's commitment to curbing "cyberdissidents," some critics suggest that multinational corporations need to become "better corporate citizens." Steps need to be taken, they insist, to ensure that fundamental human rights are privileged over profiteering. For instance, Reporters Without Borders, an international non-governmental organization, argues that corporations should adopt codes designed to enable the freedom of expression and the free flow of information.

The problem of digital information and human rights can be expected to continue to generate controversy. For example, although Google is known for its corporate mantra "Don't be evil," it is too early to predict what its long-term search engine policy will be in China.
