---
images: []
order: 207
title: Technology and the Development of Capitalism
---

Early capitalist economic practices appeared throughout Europe from the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries during a period known as "mercantilism" or "merchant capitalism." Mercantilism was a system under which nations traded for profit by exchanging manufactured goods for gold and silver bullion. Mercantilism relied on extensive state regulation of economic activity, the establishment of colonies for raw materials and labor, and manufacturing and trade geared toward a surplus of exports over imports. The mercantilist era helped give rise to capitalism through the creation of strong national states, uniform monetary and legal systems, and the accumulation of vast amounts of capital. Mercantilism was criticized, most famously, by Adam Smith in his *The Wealth of Nations* (1776) for supporting too strict controls over the economy, for maintaining protectionist tariffs, and for focusing on manufacturing and money supply rather than on consumption and trade. Mid-eighteenth-century economic theories and the rise of political liberalism, with its emphasis on individual liberty, helped to transform European economies from mercantilist to capitalist.

Perhaps even more important to the rise of capitalism than conceptual developments in political economy and trade liberalization was the development of a number of key technologies. Advances in mechanized agriculture, steam-powered machinery and semi-automatic factories fueled the European industrial revolution and transformed the nature of production from manual to mechanical. Industrialized production was made possible by such innovations as the steam engine, improved iron-smelting (based on coke rather than on charcoal), and machine tools. These innovations led to the mechanized production of textiles, coal-mining, and factory-based manufacturing. Later innovations in transportation (railways, canals) and communication (telegraph) led to expansion and trade which advanced and spread the industrial revolution through Europe and the United States.

As the new productive forces of the industrial manufacturing system replaced feudalism, agrarianism and guilds, a new social class emerged: the bourgeoisie and their political order. The bourgeoisie supplanted the aristocracy as the dominant economic and political class in industrialized nations. They acquired their wealth and power from profits accumulated during production, or, as Karl Marx explains it, from surplus value appropriated from unremunerated wages of workers who generate wealth. The bourgeoisie and workers (also known as capitalists and proletariat, or capital and labor) are defined by their different relations to the means of production: capitalists own the means of production, hire workers in exchange for wages, and strive for profits and increased market share; proletariats sell their labor power, receive wages, and produce surplus value for the capitalists. Surplus value is the key to Marx's critique of capitalism. Profit (along with rent and interest) is derived from unpaid surplus labor performed by the proletariat for the capitalist. It is value accumulated beyond the costs of raw materials and machinery (constant capital) and wages (variable capital). It is capital, not particular capitalists, that is responsible for constantly expanding wealth and markets.

The industrial revolution and capitalism developed alongside one another. Industrial manufacturing relies on cheap, available, unskilled labor and thus depends upon the division of labor (i.e. the commodification of labor) for its success. The transformation of labor into a commodity, in turn, presupposes a complex network of social, political and technological preconditions including the availability of machinery for factory manufacturing, a reliable supply of labor, the legal sanction for private ownership of the means of production, the social sanction for wage labor, and so on. Early capitalism was geared toward the production of commodities, using commodified labor, mechanical technical production apparatus, oriented to the production of surplus value.

Technological innovations, while not the cause of the development of eighteenthcentury capitalism, were, along with various social and political conditions, essential to its creation and subsequent success.

The so-called "second industrial revolution" occurred near the end of the nineteenthcentury, and further transformed the economies of Europe, the Americas and much of the world. Important developments of this time include the internal combustion engine, which led to the automobile, motorcycle, boats, pumps, machinery and factories; steel-making improved to make large quantities available inexpensively; innovations in the chemical industry and chemical engineering led to developments in the production of sulfuric acid, sodium bicarbonate, ammonium, and nitrogen compounds, including explosives and fertilizers; advances in petroleum-processing and -drilling led to the production of fuels, lubricants and other petrochemicals; the development of

the electricity industry led to the replacement of gas lighting, heating and industrial power; and communication technologies such as the telegraph, the telephone, the gramophone, the radio and the cinema further contributed to mass production and the formation of a mass society.

In addition to technological innovations, several developments in techniques of production developed alongside widespread social change. One such technique was "scientific management," popularized by Frederick Taylor's *The Principles of Scientific Management* (1911). Also known as "Taylorism," the aim of scientific management was to improve productive efficiency, maximize output and develop techniques to motivate employees. Taylor introduced practices such as management standardization, task specialization, work design and work method analysis, and stopwatch timing of production activities. Subsequent research in scientific management included studies of human motion and the principles of motion economy, rational-economic incentive schemes for workers, and personnel management and human resources development.

Another important technique of production was the development of assembly-line manufacturing processes. In the assembly line, interchangeable parts are assembled by several different individuals in an ordered, routinized fashion to create a product. The aim of assembly-line manufacturing is to produce more units, faster, in a more cost-effective way than if an entire product were fashioned by a single person. In 1913, Henry Ford designed automobile factories using assembly-line production and is widely credited with perfecting, if not inventing, the practice.

Early twentieth-century capitalism is sometimes known as "Fordism," an economic system that espoused the virtues of high productivity, high profits, inexpensive products and high wages that would enable workers to purchase what they produced. Fordism depended on automated, standardized industrial production geared toward a mass consumer market. using the assembly line with relatively high wages compared to other economic sectors. Fordism intensified the accumulation of capital by value and further entrenched the division of labor by deskilling workers and heightening capitalist control over the means of production.
