---
images: []
order: 208
title: Monopoly and Welfare State Capitalism
---

In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, the ownership of large-scale industries became increasingly concentrated into industrial trusts or monopolies. At the same time, banks and financiers assumed increasing control over the production process and began to serve the interests of speculators and financial interests rather than the needs of producers and consumers. Banking systems, equity markets and stock exchanges were established in Europe and the United States, further transforming the aim of capitalism from a system of production toward a means of accumulating profit. In response to the rise of monopolies and large-scale financiers, which undermined capitalist growth, and rendered the economy volatile and prone to recessions and depressions, were two important social–political developments: the rise of the labor movement, and increased government intervention in economic activities.

The factory system of production, in spite of its Fordist pretensions, tended to produce a large population of underpaid workers, typically working long hours in poor conditions. In response, various trade unions began to form through the early-tomid-nineteenth century. By the end of the century, labor movements throughout the industrialized world began to demand improved working conditions and a working day no longer than eight hours. As strikes and boycotts became more common, governments were forced to intervene, often by supplying military force to break strikes, but just as often by mediating conflicts and offering arbitration. The labor movement led to reforms in labor laws, occupational safety, collective bargaining rights, elimination of child labor, a shortened working week, and other progressive legislation designed to improve the lives of workers. The rise of labor movements internationally, coupled with the challenge to capitalism posed by communism and democratic socialism, compelled governments to regulate capitalist economies in order to maintain economic and political stability.

Welfare capitalism refers to the practice that appeared in the United States from the 1880s to the 1920s that provided private, employer-based social welfare services to workers. Welfare capitalism was a response to the widespread worker discontent and social reform activists in an attempt to placate employees while resisting government regulation of markets and union organization. Employers began to provide such things as meal plans, recreational activities, language classes, religious services, as well as more meaningful services such as retirement benefits, healthcare, and housing. The most extensive welfare capitalist projects were the short-lived "company towns" where companies owned and provided for everything workers needed in order to live, including housing, food, medical care, recreation and other necessities of life.

The Great Depression of the 1930s revealed inherent limitations of welfare capitalism, which could not provide adequate social welfare protection to nearly enough workers. President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal programs (1933–7) in the United States were designed to rescue the collapsed capitalist economy while providing a vast social welfare system for citizens. New Deal programs provided direct relief to workers and farmers in the form of labor, food, housing and loans; recovery to the fragile capitalist economy through an "emergency budget" to overcome the effects of the depression; and national reforms to stabilize the economy, set minimum wages, manage agricultural production, insure banks, and protect the rights of workers to organize. Rather than nationalize banks, railroads and other major industries, Roosevelt attempted to balance the interests of workers and capitalists in a concept of government known as "welfare state capitalism," in which the state plays a crucial role in protecting the stability of markets, facilitating capitalist accumulation, and ensuring the economic and social welfare of its citizens. President Lyndon B. Johnson further extended the role of the welfare state with his Great Society programs, which included education, medical care, transportation, civil rights, environmental protections and the arts.

The welfare state also supported research and development in science and technology. In the United States, the National Institutes of Health provided medical research; the US Atomic Energy Commission nuclear and particle physics research; the National Aeronautics and Space Administration space science and exploration; the National Science Foundation general scientific and engineering research; and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency provided defense research. These are just some among many publicly funded programs geared toward advancing the development of science and technology.

Welfare state capitalist governments exist throughout the world. Germany is generally believed to be the first welfare state; other welfare states developed during the early twentieth century as a capitalist compromise between communism and fascism. Western Europe, Scandinavia, Canada, Australia and New Zealand are noted for having more extensive welfare provisions than the United States.

### Technology and Late Capitalism

By the 1970s a crisis had emerged in the global capitalist system measured by a decline in the general rate of profit owing to an increase in oil prices, increased competition from Asian markets, and a decline in welfare state economic protections while supporting increased privatization of goods and services. Fordism was plagued by high raw material costs, high inventory costs, and factory systems of production that were slow to respond to changes in the market; circulation time and costs were as slow as the machinery they used; technological research and development was sacrificed under Fordism for short-term profit; consumers were reacting against mass-produced, standardized products; and the relationships among suppliers, engineers, producers and distributors were too poorly integrated to innovate as rapidly as the market demanded.

What evolved was an economic system, found in most industrialized countries today, known as "late capitalism." Also known as "post-Fordism," the current mode of production is based on the widespread use of information technologies, a "just in time" system of production and distribution of commodities (i.e. fewer raw materials, more partially assembled parts), the elimination of non-"value-adding" positions in production (i.e. management, quality control), mass customization tailored to meet more individualized consumer desires, the creation of "knowledge worker" jobs, and cooperation among and within firms. The current trend in production is toward smaller, more specialized markets, flexibility designed into production and distribution systems, and integrated clusters of specialized firms.

Advocates of this form of "lean production" claim that it will greatly improve capital–labor relations, capital–consumer relations, and eventually capitalism itself. Critics of lean production maintain that, although its technical and social conditions differ from those of Fordism, it does not differ substantially with respect to the basic character of capitalism, and thus fundamental antagonisms continue to exist between labor and capital, consumers are not appreciably more empowered, economic power is more (not less) asymmetrical between capital and consumers, and the connection between economic expansion and global justice is, for better or worse, the same as it was in the Fordist production era.
