---
images: []
order: 210
title: ELISABETH K. KELAN
---

Although technologies are a pervasive part of our everyday life, we rarely think about technology as gendered. If we look at toys for children alone, it is very evident that boys tend to get game consoles and remote-control cars while girls get dolls to play with. From an early age, we are confronted with subtle messages about which technologies are deemed appropriate for which gender. While men tend to be associated with technologies like spacecraft, fast cars and advanced computing, the technologies associated with women are things like kitchen tools, which often do not qualify as real technology at all. In this article this politics of gender and technology is discussed.

The area of gender and technology studies has been flourishing in recent years, and scholars have developed sophisticated approaches to understand better the gender– technology relation (Gill and Grint 1995; Wajcman 1991, 2004). These approaches start from the assumption that gender and technology are co-produced and mutually shaping. This means that technology influences gender relations and gender relations influence technology. The notion of co-production of gender and technology needs some unpacking. Faulkner (2001: 83) distinguishes between the gender *in* technology and the gender *of* technology. The latter refers to the symbolic association between gender and technology. Certain technologies are perceived as masculine in society, such as computing technology, fast cars, spacecraft or construction tools; whereas other technologies, like kitchen tools or beauty tools, are commonly associated with femininity.

How people enact and use these technologies often reflects these gender associations. Research has found that men working in high-tech environments who see themselves as technologically well versed also construct themselves as technologically incompetent when it comes to operating the microwave in the home (Massey 1996). Another example is the telephone. The telephone was initially marketed for use by businessmen (at that time almost exclusively men) to communicate with the office while at home. However, women quickly took over the telephone and made it their own. This has meant that now the telephone is strongly associated with femininity (Rakow 1988). This can be illustrated through research which has shown that men describe their use of the telephone as more task-oriented than the chatty use which is associated with women (Lohan 2001). Through the association with technology, gender is enacted.

Gender *in* technology refers in contrast to how gender enters the design of technology. Looking back in time, it appears that most inventors of technologies were men. Developing technology is an endeavor largely undertaken by men. When designing technologies people bring their personal experience with them, and this flows into the design of technologies. These mechanisms may be very subtle, in that designers use themselves as the template for the ideal user, as happened in the design of a digital city in the Netherlands (Rommes et al. 2001). This implicitly excluded women, and few women participated in the Internet forum.

The perceived gender of the user of technology has influenced how technologies develop. Even though users can subvert technologies by using them in ways not originally intended, designers have considerable power in inscribing gender to technical artifacts. This has been called "gender scripts" (Rommes et al. 2001). The construction of the user is often very flexible. Research by Hofmann (1999) shows how, in the design of interfaces, secretaries are either constructed as able to learn shortcut keystrokes, or as unable to navigate independently, and are therefore provided with menus. Webster (1996) in turn has demonstrated how the image of the female user of office technology meant that the first generation of word processors was developed from office equipment rather than from computing. These examples show that gender is highly relevant when technologies are designed.

Research on gender and technology has, however, shown that not all designers and innovators are men, and recent feminist research has started to uncover women inventors who have not entered the history books or whose inventions are not associated with them. An example of this can be found in early computing. Some of the earliest computer programmers were women, which is partly because at this time programming was seen as a clerical task and not of high status (Perry and Gerber 1990). However, as soon as the importance of computer programming rose, the stereotypical programmer became more a man than a woman. The contribution of women like Ada Lovelance to computing is increasingly recognized after much work has gone into uncovering her contribution to the design and construction of early computers (Stanley 1993). One dimension of the politics of gender and technology is therefore to uncover women inventors of technology who have been forgotten by history.

That women inventors are often written out of history reflects gender relations, as women are not associated with technologies, and ground-breaking technologies are commonly associated with men. That computer programming has changed gender from being associated with women to becoming a male endeavor is important as it reflects that during that time the economic potential of computers rose and important things in society are commonly associated with men. Technology reflects gender; but gender also shapes technology, and this is an important process to study as it tells us something about power relations in society.

In recent times much debate has arisen about how gender is relevant in the information and knowledge society. There was much discussion about women lagging behind in elements like Internet use and participation. It was perceived as a problem that more men than women were "online," and it has been suggested that men dominate computer-mediated communication and are said to exclude women through using crude language (Herring 2000). However, in recent times the figures for Internet use in many Western countries are more gender-balanced (for the USA, Fallows 2005). This could

mean that gender and technology in relation to new technologies is no longer a problem as equal participation is supposedly ensured in the West. However, this would mean neglecting that access is not the only issue but how technologies are used is equally important (Henwood et al. 2000).

The design and use of technology is still gendered. Research on gender and technology has, for instance, found that women in technical education and professions distance themselves from technology, while men construct a close relationship with technology (Corneliussen 2004; Henwood 1998). When engaging with technology, people are enacting gender because it is commonly assumed that men are close to technology while women are not. These gender relations seem to re-establish themselves even when women have chosen technical education and professions. This assumption that people are "doing gender" while engaging with technology links well with current gender theories. In current gender theories, gender is perceived as something that is "done" in interactions. This means that men and women engage in certain activities that are gendered masculine or feminine to count as proper men or women.

This perspective may explain why women do not enter technical professions which are associated with masculinity. Although in earlier times it was not allowed that women enter technical education, or board spaceships for that matter, today despite the few institutionalized barriers for women's entry women often select non-technical professions. This can be interpreted as a move to count as a proper woman who is not interested in technology. As we have seen, this continues even in technical education and professions when women distance themselves more from technology by defining it as not part of their identity. Women therefore are still under-represented in technical fields which commonly attract high status, prestige and remuneration. It thus perpetuates gender relations in which, in general, the masculine side is valued over the feminine side.

This raises the question which politics may be useful to challenge and change these gender and technology relationships. Seeing gender and technology as mutually shaping means that gender and technology are constantly in flux and can be redefined. This redefinition takes place through practicing gender in such a way that it counteracts and potentially subverts current gender expectations in relation to technology. For instance, that women use certain technologies or are present in certain technical professions which are gendered masculine challenges the hegemonic gender order.

It is often expected that the goals of a new politics of gender and technology is to make men and women more alike and eliminate gender differences through this. However, the issue appears to be to open equal opportunities for men and women by allowing them to enact divergent relationships with technology. Rather than making women more like men or vice versa, one possible avenue for change would be to allow for multiple differences and similarities. This means to accept that men and women are not homogenous groups, but that there are differences between and among men and women. Individuals should be given the choice to enact different positions such as enjoying this technology or not, but these may not have to be linked to gender. It would then be possible to interrogate critically the gender–technology relationship and to seek ways to develop an alternative politics.

### References and Further Reading

- Corneliussen, H. (2004). " 'I Don't Understand Computer Programming, Because I'm a Woman!' Negotiating Gendered Positions in a Norwegian Discourse of Computing," in K. Morgan, C. A. Brebbia, J. Sanchez and A. Voiskounsky (eds), *Human Perspectives in the Internet Society: Culture, Psychology and Gender* (Southampton: WIT Press), pp. 173–82.
- Fallows, D. (2005). "How Women and Men Use the Internet," http://www.pewinternet.org/ PPF/r/171/report\_display.asp, 28 December 2005.
- Faulkner, W. (2001). "The Technology Question in Feminism: A View from Feminist Technology Studies," *Women's Studies International Forum*, 24 (1): 79–95.
- Gill, R. and Grint, K. (1995). "The Gender–Technology Relation: An Introduction," in K. Grint and R. Gill (eds), *The Gender–Technology Relation: Contemporary Theory and Research* (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 1–28.
- Henwood, F. (1998). "Engineering Difference: Discourses on Gender, Sexuality and Work in a College of Technology," *Gender and Education*, 10 (1): 35–49.
- Henwood, F., Wyatt, S., Miller, N. and Senker, P. (2000). "Critical Perspectives on Technologies, in/Equalities and the Information Society," in S. Wyatt, F. Henwood, N. Miller and P. Senker (eds), *Technology and in/Equality: Questioning the Information Society* (London: Routledge), pp. 1–18.
- Herring, S. C. (2000). "Gender Differences in Cmc: Findings and Implications," *The CPRS Newsletter*, 18 (1).
- Hofmann, J. (1999). "Writer, Texts and Writing Acts: Gendered User Images in the Word Processing Software," in D. MacKenzie and J. Wajcman (eds), *The Social Shaping of Technology* (Buckingham: Open University Press).
- Lohan, M. (2001). "Men, Masculinities and 'Mundane' Technologies: The Domestic Telephone," in E. Green and A. Adam (eds), *Virtual Gender: Technology, Consumption and Identity* (London: Routledge), pp. 189–206.
- Massey, D. (1996). "Masculinity, Dualism and High Technology," in N. Duncan (ed.), *Body Space: Destabilising Geographies of Gender and Sexuality* (London: Routledge), pp. 109–26.
- Perry, R. and Gerber, L. (1990). "Women and Computers: An Introduction," *Signs*, 16 (1): 74–101. Rakow, L. F. (1988). "Women and the Telephone: The Gendering of a Communications Technology," in C. Kramarae (ed.), *Technology and Women's Voices – Keeping in Touch* (London: Routledge), pp. 207–29.
- Rommes, E., Oost, E. van and Oudshoorn, N. (2001). "Gender in the Design of the Digital City of Amsterdam," in E. Green and A. Adam (eds), *Virtual Gender: Technology, Consumption and Identity* (London: Routledge), pp. 239–61.
- Stanley, A. (1993). *Mothers and Daughters of Invention* (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press).
- Wajcman, J. (1991). *Feminism Confronts Technology* (Cambridge: Polity).
- Wajcman, J. (2004). *Technofeminism* (Cambridge: Polity).
- Webster, J. (1996). *Shaping Women's Work: Gender, Employment and Information Technology* (New York: Longman).
