---
images: []
order: 212
title: ERIK JONES
---

Technology plays an ambivalent role in European politics and economics. It is a source of modernity and progress but it is also a threat to tradition and to equality. Europeans celebrate the influence of technology on economic competitiveness and express concern about its impact on environmental sustainability. Technology has shaped the development of European political ideology, and it has threatened to undermine the legitimacy and overwhelm the capacity of the European nation-state.

Modern Europe is born of the technological advances which constitute the industrial revolution. The spread of industrial technology changed fundamentally the structure of the European economy and society in which it was embedded. New factories drew Europeans from the land into the city even as improvements in travel, communication and sanitation facilitated a gradual expansion of urban areas to match the new urban population. While dramatic and unprecedented, the transformation of Europe was less shocking perhaps than the impact of the industrial revolution elsewhere. The industrial revolution was grounded in Europe, and so Europe's economic and political transformation moved at the pace of technological change. This pace was revolutionary at the time and yet contrasts sharply with the sudden introduction of "industrialization" outside Europe and the consequent urban explosion experienced by the developing world today.

Even within Europe, the influence and timing of technological innovation was not everywhere the same. Moreover, the consequences of this differential development were historically important, as is clear in the writings of Alexander Gerschenkron. Gerschenkron argued that there were economic advantages to "backwardness," as later-developing countries benefit from the adoption of technological innovations made by early-industrializing nations. Moreover, the late developers can leap ahead by avoiding failed developmental trajectories and by investing in the most advanced productive machinery. This model explains not only the belated surge of Germany as an industrial power in the latter part of the nineteenth century but also the miraculous recovery of the German economy after the Second World War. By contrast, Great Britain, Europe's earliest and most established industrial country, experienced a relative decline in its Great Power rivalry with the German Empire in the late– nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries and a further relative decline during the first three decades after the Second World War.

The link between technology and modernity in Europe was ideological as well as physical. The widespread adoption of Fordist manufacturing techniques in the early part of the twentieth century nurtured the rise of powerful trade unions, among both Christian Democrats and Social Democrats. In turn, these unions became deeply involved in the stabilization of macro-economic performance through concerted wage bargaining (usually at the national level) and in the development of the European welfare state. As a result, European conceptions of Christian and Social Democracy share a commitment to working-class solidarity both across society and over time. Such commitments go beyond rhetoric. Social solidarity can be seen in the wage compression across different categories of workers that results from nationally concerted bargaining. Solidarity over time is expressed on the Continent in terms of entitlements arising from the payment of social insurance premiums and in the United Kingdom in the willingness to finance welfare state benefits from general revenues.

The link between technology and modernity in Europe has not always been positive either in terms of ideological commitment or, more broadly, in terms of economic and social structure. The spread of mass manufacturing after the Second World War sparked a growth in consumption that dramatically increased standards of living and raised life expectations. At the same time, however, this consumerism whittled away at class distinctions – particularly those based on Marxist notions of relationship to the means of production. In turn, this weakened the political bonds holding voters to either Christian Democratic or Social Democratic political parties. The effects manifested in three different ways: through increasing competition between the traditional parties, through increased opportunities for new political movements to emerge, and through declining voter participation at election time. Traditional European political parties adapted by de-emphasizing their ideological appeals and instead focusing on issues and personalities. The results were only partly successful. While the major parties were able to stabilize their relative decline, they did so at the expense of longer-term voter identification and commitment.

The structural shift in economics was even more marked. A change in the industrial patterns from Fordist mass employment in mass manufacturing to a more capitalintensive and flexible "post-Fordist" paradigm presented European trade unions with two different challenges. The first was to adapt to the decline in the manufacturing share in employment relative to the public and service sectors of the economy. Since productivity is generally higher in manufacturing than in the public or service sectors, this relative decline in manufacturing employment created a rift between manufacturing employees who could demand higher wages and service-sector employees who could not. National trade unions that tried to put upward pressure on wages across both categories of workers soon found themselves in conflict with governments eager to hold down price inflation. Meanwhile, national trade unions that tried to maintain wage discipline faced defections from manufacturing unions and a loss of membership overall.

The second challenge for European trade unions presented by the shift from Fordist to post-Fordist manufacturing was to accommodate the increasingly differentiated nature of manufacturing work and the structural basis for manufacturing unemployment. Although European trade unions tried to maintain a commitment to worker solidarity, such commitment no longer translated easily into wage-bargaining claims

even at the sectoral level let alone across the country as a whole. Instead, sectoral wage bargains gave way to wage drift as employers reclassified workers to reward highly productive individuals with implicit "efficiency" wages. The result was both to encourage wage differentiation (as opposed to wage compression) and to stimulate further investment in capital deepening and productivity growth. The number of manufacturing jobs declined even as manufacturing output continued to increase. European trade union membership and wage-bargaining coverage retreated as manufacturing technology continued to advance.

By the 1970s, Europeans began openly to question the merits of continued technological advance. Politicians expressed concern about the governability of their societies, employers complained about the militancy of the trade unions, labor leaders worried about the spread of structural unemployment, and economists began to debate the limits to growth. Development economists like Fritz Schumacher had particular influence in this context. Schumacher argued that economics should be recast "as if people mattered" and manufacturing should be based on "intermediate technologies" that treated material productivity as only one of many goals in manufacturing. Such claims resonated strongly within the nascent European environmentalist movement and played an important role in transforming that movement into political parties able to address a range of issues beyond environmental conservation.

The emergence of two new issues reinforced European ambivalence toward technology: the 1973 energy price shock and the introduction of intermediate-range nuclear weapons into the European theater of the Cold War. The energy price shock gave dramatic emphasis to concerns about the limits of growth, particularly as Europe is dependent upon imported hydrocarbons to meet its energy needs. Most European countries responded by promoting greater energy efficiency. In France, they also invested heavily in the development and expansion of civilian nuclear technology as an alternative energy resource. French promotion of nuclear energy was facilitated by the efforts made by previous governments to underscore the prestige advantages of France's independent nuclear deterrent. Other countries did not have this tradition for national grandeur or the aspiration to join the nuclear club, and so they resisted efforts to expand civilian nuclear use.

Resistance to nuclear technology increased dramatically once West Europeans discovered that the Soviet Union had installed intermediate-range SS-20 missiles in Central and Eastern Europe. These SS-20s threatened to undermine the delicate balance of East–West deterrence and so to trigger a destabilizing arms race in Europe. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) responded with a double-track strategy of negotiating the withdrawal of the SS-20s and threatening to install a new generation of intermediate-range nuclear weapons in Western Europe should the negotiations fail. However, the success of this double-track strategy depended upon the willingness of two NATO allies – West Germany and Italy – to accept the installation of American intermediate-range nuclear weapons on their soil. Massive peace demonstrations broke out in opposition to this move both in the countries affected and across Europe as a whole. In turn, these anti-nuclear movements divided much of the European political left between those who were more concerned about traditional economic issues related to income and employment and those more focused on issues related to nuclear technology, the environment, and the limits to growth.

The division of the European left at the end of the 1970s coincided with a third phase in attitudes toward technology: moving from modernization, to conservation, to competition. The rise of Japan as a world-beating economy during the 1970s and early 1980s underscored the importance of technological innovation to European prosperity and employment. The jobs crisis was not just the result of manufacturing employers replacing workers with machines; it was also the consequence of low-cost and highly productive manufacturing competition from abroad. This new challenge could only be met through combined research and development. Hence European leaders – spurred by French president François Mitterrand – began efforts to promote greater "precompetitive" research collaboration across European countries prior to a more general re-launching of the process of European integration. Mitterrand's argument was that national research efforts were no longer sufficient to achieve and maintain a competitive advantage in the global economy. Only combined European research efforts in a European single market would suffice.

This new attention to economic competitiveness did not resolve all of Europe's concerns about technology and yet it did pave the way for a re-prioritization of interests. Competitiveness through increased productivity is one issue where European manufacturing employers and trade unions could find common ground. Hence the 1980s saw a resurgence of concerted wage moderation in order to free up financial resources for productive investment. This trend was more pronounced in many of the smaller European countries than in the larger ones and it was also more evident on the Continent than in the United Kingdom (where wage moderation was enforced against the opposition of the trade unions).

As competitiveness became more important, other technological issues became less so. The progress of arms control in Europe both before and after the end of the Cold War sapped much of the concern for nuclear weapons. Meanwhile, European anxiety about the limits of growth softened to focus on broader notions of "sustainability," whether in reference to energy resources, the natural environment, or the welfare state. Concern for sustainability waxed with the growth of evidence about the effects of global warming and yet it never eclipsed the importance of technology for economic competitiveness in Europe. If anything, the revolution in information and communications technology and the resurgence of American competitiveness in the 1990s only reinforced the need for combined European investment in research.

Yet sustainability did not disappear as a focus for attention, either. Instead, the fusion of competitiveness and sustainability lies at the center of Europe's current consensus on technology – at least in broad economic and political terms. It can be found in the 1993 European Commission White Paper on Jobs, Growth, Competitiveness, and it is manifest in the March 2000 commitment at the Lisbon European Council summit to focus the energies of the European Union on building the world's most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy within the first decade of the twenty-first century.

The European Union is far from achieving the strategic objective it announced in Lisbon. In part this is due to the weakness of Europe's traditional political parties as they try to implement necessary market structural reforms. Although Europeans may have adapted their priorities in light of changes in technology, they have been slower to adapt their political structures. European democracy was institutionalized in the early days of the industrial revolution and consolidated in the age of widespread Fordist manufacturing. As a result, it is ill-suited to the requirements for dynamic flexibility of the information age. Political processes are too slow to hold on to the popular attention, and political parties are too weak, both organizationally and financially, to bring about any radical restructuring.

The gap between the technology that predominates in economics and institutions that frame European politics is growing and not shrinking. Even worse, the tension between technology and politics is slowing down the pace of technological adaptation elsewhere. This tension can be seen in the "digital divide" between those who have unfettered access to the information and resources made available via the Internet and those who do not. It is manifest in the sudden emergence and implosion of political movements like that surrounding the Dutch populist Pim Fortuyn. It is apparent in the widespread concerns arising about the permeability of national borders to foreign migrants. And it is underscored by the extreme difficulty of providing security in the context of a global war on terror.

The challenge Europeans face is to adapt political institutions in order to ensure that issues like those related to income distribution, political participation, migration and security can be properly managed. This challenge is both facilitated and complicated by the emergence of new technologies. Nevertheless, it is not a problem of technology itself. Europe's challenge goes beyond either sustainability or competitiveness to touch on the core legitimacy of the European national state. Technology's role in European politics and economics remains ambivalent.
