---
images: []
order: 214
title: Recent History and Politics
---

India achieved independence with the withdrawal of the British Raj in 1947. China defeated the Japanese in the Second World War but was immediately engulfed in the last stages of a long-drawn-out civil war, ending with the retreat of the Kuomintang to Taiwan and the establishment of the People's Republic of China by the Chinese Communist Party led by Mao Zedong in 1949.

India is said to be the world's largest democracy and is celebrated as such by the Western press, although its democracy as well as its human rights record may be flawed in many aspects. In contrast, China is said to be the world's largest authoritarian as well as totalitarian state, and is often vilified as such.

Both countries may be said to have been scarred by their respective histories before independence. Some Indian elites resent(ed) having been colonized for two hundred years; however, the resentment could be said to be relatively muted, compared with that of their Chinese counterpart; the British Raj has left them a lasting legacy, the English language. The Chinese – elite or ordinary – felt and still feel humiliated by the unequal treaties entailing the loss of sovereignty during the period of the Opium Wars, the first of which was signed in 1842, the annexation of Chinese territory by Japan

and other Western powers at the end of the First Sino-Japanese War in 1894–5, and then the invasion and formal occupation of northern and even parts of central China by Japan during the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–41). Furthermore, many leading members of the Indian ruling élite – from Jawaharlal Nehru, to Indira Gandhi, to the present prime minister, Dr Manmohan Singh, are all Oxbridge-educated, whereas the Chinese ruling class, to a man or woman, are primarily home-educated products (Mao himself had never seen the need to leave China, unlike some of his colleagues who went for short, limited periods to study or work in foreign countries, such as Japan and Europe); hence so-called Western – political and economic – values, viewed as a package (colonialism, militarism, exploitation, capitalism, democracy, freedom) are perceived with far greater suspicion than in India, especially when the Chinese consider/considered their civilization/culture to be superior, as evidenced by the name "China," which means "the country at the center" of the world.

### The West: Politics, Economy and Technology

There is a commonly held simplistic view of the modern history of the West (Western Europe) that the triad of democratic politics, free-market capitalism and science-driven high technology went inextricably hand in hand. This is not the place to examine this thesis in depth. Suffice it to make the following brief observations: modern science may be said to have begun in seventeenth-century Europe, but it took two centuries at least before the fundamental discoveries of physics and chemistry induced what today we call high tech. Before that, far from science leading and invention following, inventions were autonomous of science; and, in one spectacular instance, it was the invention of the steam engine which led to the fundamental science of thermodynamics. Industrialization took off in Europe, on the whole, without the benefits of modern basic science and its application to industry. The first industrial revolution – water–wind–wood complex – rested on what may be called craft-based technology and inventions which found their way to Europe, in many instances, from China, via the Middle East. The second industrial revolution – steam–coal–iron complex – was similarly based. Science-led/-induced high tech did not make an appearance till the 1840s.3

The history of capitalism is as complex as that of technology. In brief, finance capitalism began as early as the Italian city states during the Renaissance which had nothing to do with the rise of Protestantism, Weber notwithstanding. *Laissez-faire* capitalism was/is, in any case, more associated with the Anglo-Saxon world than with continental Europe, especially France which has a strong tradition of *étatisme*.

The beginnings of mass democracy in the UK only occurred with the Reform Act of 1832, and full adult suffrage was not available until women were given the vote in 1928 – and, in Switzerland, only in 1971.

In other words, historically, capitalism in its various forms in the West needed neither science-induced technology nor democracy (universal adult suffrage), nor what we, today, call human rights to develop and flourish. Modern science in Western Europe began in the seventeenth century, a period not noted either for human rights or for democracy, while applied science leading to high tech, as already observed, did not take off till the mid-nineteenth century.
