---
images: []
order: 215
title: Nationalism, Modernization and Westernization
---

The briefest historical outline of the various complex thematic developments given above shows that it would be imprudent to understand "Westernization" to mean that China (if not India) would be happy to buy "off the peg" Western political, economic and cultural values without further scrutiny. The case of China parallels that of nineteenth-century Japan – the Meiji reforms were not about Western values *per se*, but about modernization, that is, the attempt to restructure the feudal/agrarian organization of society based on the warrior *samurai* class to one which emphasized economic growth, industrialism and military power, this time resting not on the traditional sword but high tech. In this limited sense only, "Westernization" may be said to equal "modernization," how to bring one's country up to the economic strength of the West, so that it may be able to compete with the West on more or less equal terms and, therefore, to be respected by Western powers. In other words, modernization goes hand in hand with nationalism – in this project, India is as nationalistic as China, although it remains true that their respective nationalisms assume different aspects given the differences in their histories.

The intellectual debate about modernization in the context of nationalism in China as well as attempts at modernization began in the nineteenth and continued into the twentieth century, although the project was much interrupted, first by the Japanese and Western occupation of parts of China, and then later by the next wave of Japanese conquest which constituted the Second Sino-Japanese War, after the so-called "Lugouqiao (Marco Polo Bridge)" Incident, in 1937 to be followed in 1941 by China's formal entry into the Second World War after the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor. In 1949, the project was resumed in earnest, first by following the route of state capitalism (the command economy) and then, after the death of Mao, by the economic reforms associated with Deng Xiaoping.

Chinese intellectuals considered/consider modern science and its technology, though initiated by the West, as institutions and values which are detachable from the usually conceived package of "Western values" said to consist of mass democracy with its associated freedoms to form at least two political parties of more or less equal political/economic strength, to vote (intermittently) for them, to have some freedom in the media to express disagreements and criticisms of government policies, etc. In such an analysis, Western countries grow strong and powerful, economically as well as militarily, primarily through the discoveries of basic science and their induced technologies. It follows that one can follow the scientific/technological path in pursuit of modernization without necessarily jeopardizing more traditional cultural values – in the nineteenth century, the Japanese did just that and were successful. The intellectual debate which began during the late Qing Dynasty (1644–1911) threw up a "couplet" elegantly expressed in the traditional four-word format which sums up this spirit of development and modernization in the context of nationalism: *gu wei jin yong; yang wei zhong yong*, which freely translated means "Ancient knowledge/wisdom to serve contemporary interests; Western knowledge to serve China's interests." This expression was made popular when Mao adopted it and it became one of the much-cited slogans during the Cultural Revolution (1966–76); it remains abiding currency.

From such a perspective, the economic reforms of the last twenty-five years are less of a rupture from what has preceded than might appear at first sight. The first stage of modernization and development, which began with the establishment of the People's Republic of China, rested, by and large, on the command economy, a form of capitalism pioneered by the West in the form of the Soviet Union, and using in the main the high tech also developed by the Soviet Union. However, simultaneously, it also encouraged low-tech, labor-intensive activities. This stage paved the way for the next, when China outgrew the command economy/labor-intensive-low-tech model, and opted not so much for the *laissez-faire* free market/private enterprise model associated with the Anglo-Saxon economies as for the *dirigisme/étatisme* of the European continental model, in particular the French. This more recent borrowing is also in keeping with the spirit of the axiom cited above, to use Western tools, modifying them whenever and wherever necessary, in order to serve and promote Chinese needs and interests. To date, the Chinese government has seen no need to borrow the Western notion of mass democracy and some of its associated ideas to serve Chinese needs and interests (as perceived, at least, by the ruling elites). Whether it would ever do so remains the \$64,000 question; Chinese intellectuals are busy trying to revamp traditional cultural, social, political ideas to cope with the China of the twenty-first century. Whether and how they will succeed is one of the most fascinating issues of this new century.

In India, Mohandas Gandhi formulated an alternative to the standard development route. However, India, after independence, did not follow that philosophy; instead, it pursued what may be called the Fabian socialist route, implementing import substitution, central planning with strict control of the private sector of the economy, foreign trade and foreign direct investment. The government, like the Chinese one during roughly the same epoch, pursued simultaneously capital-intensive/high-tech as well as subsidizing labor-intensive/low-tech (although the latter was on a limited scale, almost only as a token gesture to the Gandhian philosophy perhaps). However, by 1990, the economy was perceived to be in crisis, which led to a series of reforms centered on liberalization (the removal of regulatory constraints), privatization (reducing the roles of the State and the public sector in business) and globalization (facilitating the expansion and penetration of multinational corporations).

From the brief sketch above, it appears that China and India, in spite of obvious differences, have pursued broadly the same economic paths in transforming their respective countries from an agrarian to a more industrialized society and, as a result, are facing roughly the same kind of social problems, namely, an increase of inequality between the industrialized/urban parts and the non-industrialized/rural parts during a period of high economic growth. Both countries are well aware that this set of issues has to be addressed; the Chinese government in its recent five-year preview has explicitly set out certain remedial policies.

In the last fifteen years or so, India, capitalizing on its heritage of the English language, has chosen to enter the globalized market mainly via the service sector, welcoming the electronic outsourcing of Western enterprises to Bangalore and other centers of electronic excellence in the country. China, on the other hand, has opted to go down the manufacturing route, to become once again the so-called manufacturing center of the world, a position it had occupied for centuries until Britain (followed by other Western countries) began its second industrial revolution in the nineteenth century.

Like all developing economies in recent years (South Korea, Taiwan), China has climbed the ladder by concentrating in the first instance on cheap, low-quality products; but, as more recent experience shows, it is capable of learning fast and of manufacturing high-quality goods which rely not merely on its low labor costs but also on its grasp and implementation of high tech. (This same tendency also obtains in India.) Indeed, foreign firms wishing to invest in China must be prepared to do deals with the Chinese government regarding (cutting-edge) technology transfer; without willingness to enter into such agreements, the billion customers awaiting the foreign investor would forever elude them. It would be wise for them to bear in mind that the strategy the Chinese deploy is what one Chinese scholar, Li Yining, at Beijing University, has called *yi shichang huan jishu* – using the market as an exchange for technology.4
