---
images: []
order: 217
title: Preamble
---

Technological change is a social process. Individuals who are the agents of such change are generally embedded in organizations, which are themselves structured by institutions, which are in turn embedded in cultural systems of meaning and value. Together, these layers of governance regulate the pace of technological change and determine its direction. The layers interact continuously, usually reinforcing one another, thereby producing characteristic paths of development at the national level.

In the American context, governance in this broad sense conspires to foster relatively rapid and occasionally radical technological change. American culture tends to be accepting of new technologies and is often enthusiastic about them. These cultural biases and their expression in law and in public policy support what Nathan Rosenberg calls "economic experimentation,"1 a diversity of private efforts to combine and recombine technological systems with organizational schemes for producing and exchanging new goods and services. The market generally decides which of these "experiments" deserve to be continued and which are to be relegated to the dustbin.

Until the twentieth century, the US federal government did little more than passively countenance this dollar-based process of generating and selecting new technologies. Since the country attained Great Power status, and especially since the Second World War, when it assumed a dominant role in the international system, the government has increasingly added to the diversity of experimentation and accelerated the pace of change. Exceptional cases notwithstanding, there are few signs that this acceleration has bumped up against cultural, political or economic limits in the early twenty-first century.

### American Liberalism

The US is at root a liberal society. Americans tend to value the individual over the collective interest and to privilege negative freedom over positive freedom – "freedom from," as Isaiah Berlin would have it, over "freedom to." Premodern status distinctions eroded more quickly in the US than in Europe and other European colonies; political rights and entrepreneurship trumped aristocracy and guild.

To be sure, these ideals were often abridged, nowhere more so than in the slaveholding South of the pre-Civil War era. None the less, in the context of abundant natural resources and a shortage of labor, they helped to animate a relatively high level of popular engagement in what the patent clause of the US Constitution labeled the "useful arts." "The annals of American invention," writes B. Zorina Khan of the nineteenth century, "were not limited to the wealthy, corporate entities, or other privileged classes, but reflected a broad spectrum of society."2

The objective of such invention was usually to get rich quick. Machines that could do something new or better than before provided platforms for enterprises that could bank on a taste for novelty among buyers. As the pace of immigration quickened after the Civil War, newly arrived Americans reinforced the receiving culture's openness to novelty, shedding their traditional ways and adopting with alacrity the means supplied by the emerging mass-production sector.

The giant corporations that arose in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to feed this mass market aroused some misgivings among Americans. Populists and Progressives gave voice to concerns about the destruction of traditions, livelihoods, and places like John Muir's beloved Hetch Hetchy Valley, near the present-day Yosemite National Park. Yet it was not the technologies *per se* that bore the brunt of these attacks, but rather the firms that produced them. Indeed, the short-lived Technocracy movement of the early 1930s revealed a deep-seated suspicion that big business was suppressing technological change and that solutions to the nation's problems could be found by unleashing it.

The technological enthusiasm of the Jazz Age of the 1920s, with its radios and automobiles, found expression once again in the post-Second World War consumer culture. For all the irony of "plastics," as whispered in the ear of "The Graduate" in the movie of that name, American consumers continued to find the pull of the new irresistible. The popular culture of technological production was renewed as well in the postwar period, especially with the appearance of hackers like the Homebrew Computer Club, which gestated the idea of the personal computer in the late 1970s in Silicon Valley.

Hacker culture came into full flower during the boom of the late 1990s, reinterpreting the American liberal creed once again. "Cyberlibertarians" construed the Internet as a new frontier for the imagination that was ungovernable not simply in practice but in principle as well. Even property rights, the collective capacity on which individual effort is based in Lockean theory, presented problems for some of them. Although the juxtaposition of extreme anti-statism and unbridled technological freedom of cyberlibertarianism never won over mainstream America, it distilled powerful tendencies that have always been latent within American society.
