---
images: []
order: 218
title: The Constitutional System
---

The institutional framework that nurtured the liberal culture and its zeal for the new – and which was in turn reinforced by that culture – was set in place by the Constitution. The founders of the US polity divided governmental power horizontally and vertically, and diluted it by establishing individual rights against the State. These constraints on the federal government fostered political and economic competition that was often expressed in technological form.

The states within the Union competed for business from the start, subsidizing turnpikes and canals and, before long, steamboats and railroads. The federal government was precluded from investing in such "internal improvements" in the antebellum period. For instance, although Congress briefly supported Samuel Morse's research on the telegraph in the 1840s, it declined an opportunity to acquire and develop the finished invention. The lack of central direction and coordination made for chaos and duplication in the new technologies of transportation and communication, but also sped their deployment and diffusion as alternative approaches were tried out by entrepreneurs and their backers at the state level.

The Civil War removed some constraints on the federal government, as evidenced in 1862 by the beginnings of a unique partnership with the states to create "colleges for the benefit of agriculture and mechanic arts." Building on a tradition of widespread, locally governed public education, the "A&Ms" brought higher education to a broad stratum of the population. They also became valuable knowledge resources for local industries, engaging in targeted research as well as in education. Agricultural experiment stations, which were linked together and supported by the US Department of Agriculture, were joined at many public universities by state-funded engineering experiment stations.

The various "internal improvements" of the postbellum era knitted together the world's largest free-trade zone. This market stimulated private investments in productive capacity of unprecedented scale, along the way accelerating productivity growth in one manufacturing industry after another. The financial and legal instruments that evolved to enable and insure such risk-taking were in part products of competition within the federal system. Most notably, the generous laws of states like New Jersey and Delaware brought into being the private corporation as we know it. The long-term security and large-scale capital made possible by this institutional form enabled the creation of the corporate R&D laboratory, the hub of technological development in the early twentieth century.

The system of constrained and divided governmental power made it difficult for those harmed by technological change in the age of industrialization to get recompense, and pre-emptive action to head off such change was nearly unheard of. The courts were the primary venue for these kinds of claims, and they acted after the fact and slowly, if at all. Only at the end of the nineteenth century, after decades of political agitation, did Congress begin to create a federal administrative structure that even remotely resembled the ideal type of bureaucracy envisioned by Max Weber around the same time. The new agencies were frequently saddled with mixed promotional and regulatory missions, and proved vulnerable to "capture" by the industries that they oversaw.

Still, technologies to safeguard human health, public safety and the natural environment began to attract substantial public interest and support around the turn of the twentieth century. New communities of practice in such fields as public health and civil engineering explicitly aligned professional interest with the common good. These progressive engineers envisioned a society operating along scientific principles, reducing the "waste" (a word with diverse connotations) they saw as inherent in the market system that had dominated the century just past.

### Federal Patronage

Business in such a scientifically managed society would not be replaced by government, but would instead practice "self-governance" through the creation of a consensus that spanned the public and private sectors. The leading exponent of this view claimed the presidency in 1928. Unfortunately for President Herbert Hoover, the Great Depression derailed his attempt to implement such a vision. The New Deal state that emerged in its place under his successor, President Franklin D. Roosevelt, presumed tension, if not hostility, between business and government. And it shattered most of the remaining constraints on federal authority, carrying out programs of "internal improvement" in a variety of technological fields, such as rural electrification and soil conservation.

Although the New Deal drew many technical experts into public service, it was not as extensive or as focused on science and technology as cognate developments in Europe; the vast bulk of technological capability in the US remained outside the compass of the state. The Second World War changed that. Under Roosevelt's prodding and with the creative efforts of Hooverites like his science advisor Vannevar Bush, the US military moved from conservatism to a radical embrace of technology during the course of the war. Employing what pioneering science policy analyst Don K. Price later called "federalism by contract," the armed forces engaged the knowledge and skills of the country's most advanced firms and most prestigious universities.3

The Cold War that followed sustained these institutional innovations. Yet they did not amount to a "military–industrial complex" dominated by a "scientific–technological elite" that President Dwight D. Eisenhower spoke of with anxiety in his 1961 farewell address.4 Military support for new technologies remained decentralized and pluralistic, not least because of the way that the Constitution divided power. The contractors favored by the new federal patrons included start-up firms as well as corporate giants. Technological know-how was widely diffused both for security reasons and because the liberal tradition seemed to demand it.

These policies, backed by a massive amount of federal spending, produced not only the "baroque arsenal"5 of ICBMs (intercontinental ballistic missiles) and MIRVs (multiple independently targetable re-entry vehicles) but also the passenger jet, computer-controlled machine tools and, eventually, the Internet. Such civilian "spinoffs" from military R&D and the academic–venture-capital–entrepreneurship complex that they helped give rise to in places like Silicon Valley provided powerful impulses to the American high-technology economy in the postwar period.

Like their military counterparts, the main federal civilian science and technology agencies were born in the early Cold War, and they operated in a similar fashion with similar results. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is paradigmatic in this regard. Opposition to federal patronage of biomedical research melted away during the Second World War, and by the 1950s the executive and legislative branches were competing to see which could propose a larger budget for this purpose. Meanwhile, individual members of Congress scrambled to build up research centers in their home districts. NIH's R&D spending stimulated rapid growth in the US pharmaceutical and medical device industries, spinning off the extraordinary new field of biotechnology in the 1970s and 1980s.

As in the late nineteenth century, technological change in the late-twentiethcentury US was not without its critics. The "affluent society," as John Kenneth Galbraith characterized it,6 provided them with more political resources and public support than their predecessors. In the 1960s and early 1970s, Congress responded to these "new social movements" with pioneering health, safety and environmental legislation that forced industry to adopt the "best available control technologies" and, in some cases, to develop new ones.

Nuclear power was the focal point of much of this criticism, and its diffusion was halted in the US in the late 1970s by public opposition and skyrocketing costs. But it would be a mistake to generalize from this unique case and this exceptional period to conclude – for better or for worse – that American institutions for governing new technologies had been transformed. Even as the Three Mile Island accident was putting the final nail in the nuclear coffin in 1979, recombinant DNA and the personal computer were capturing public enthusiasm, sparking entrepreneurship and spawning new millionaires.

### Looking Forward

Cross-national surveys conducted between 2000 and 2004 suggest that the US public continues to view science and technology more favorably than the European or Japanese publics. US government agencies, business, universities and charitable foundations continue to finance R&D at a record pace, still accounting for more than a third of the global total in 2000.7 American policies and institutions that foster technologybased entrepreneurship are envied and emulated the world over. Even nuclear power is getting a new look, as policy-makers begin to explore the options for addressing climate change realistically.

Voices of dissent have become fainter in recent years, with one prominent exception. Christian fundamentalists have blocked federal funding for embryonic stem cell research, which they see as murder, for several years. Yet this success is quickly crumbling as other countries and even US states leap into the void. The liberal regime of international trade, investment and communication, of which the US has been the primary sponsor, has stripped from this country the power to control the pace and direction of technological change. To understand governance of technological change in the coming century, we shall need to understand culture, institutions, organizations and individual behavior on a global scale.

#### Notes

- 1. N. Rosenberg, *Exploring the Black Box* (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994), pp. 87–108.
- 2. B. Z. Khan, "Technological Innovations and Endogenous Changes in US Legal Institutions, 1790–1920," National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper 10346, March 2004, p. 11.
- 3. D. K. Price, *Government and Science* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1954).

#### david m. hart

- 4. D. D. Eisenhower, "Farewell Radio and Television Address to the American People," 17 January 1961, available at http://www.eisenhower.archives.gov/farewell.htm, accessed 27 November 2006.
- 5. M. Kaldor, *The Baroque Arsenal* (New York: Hill & Wang, 1981).
- 6. J. K. Galbraith, *The Affluent Society* (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1958).
- 7. National Science Board, *Science and Engineering Indicators 2006* (Washington, D.C.: National Science Board, 2006), pp. 7–23 and pp. 4–40.
