---
images: []
order: 230
title: Preamble
---

Biomedical engineering is the application of engineering principles and techniques to medicine. It combines expertise in engineering with expertise in medicine and human biology to develop technologies and techniques for healthcare and patient care. Biomedical engineering emerged as a field after the Second World War and has expanded ever since. As a field, it is very broad, with applications ranging from molecular imaging to the construction of artificial hearts. Biomedical engineering is, however, narrower in scope than *bioengineering*, or *biological engineering*, with which it is sometimes equated. Bioengineering focuses on the engineering of biological processes and systems in general, and includes not only biomedical engineering but also agricultural engineering, food engineering and biotechnology.

In part because biomedical engineering it itself a new field, there is currently no distinct academic field of biomedical engineering ethics. Ethical issues in biomedical engineering are currently studied in the fields of bioethics, medical ethics and engineering ethics. Yet professional ethical issues in biomedical engineering are often different from the ones traditionally discussed in these fields. Biomedical engineers differ from medical practitioners, and are similar to other engineers, in that they are involved in research for and development of new technology, and do not engage in the study, diagnosis and treatment of patients. Biomedical engineers differ from other engineers, and are similar to medical practitioners, in that they aim to contribute to good patient care and healthcare. The ethical responsibilities of biomedical engineers thus combine those of engineers and medical professionals, including a responsibility to adhere to general ethical standards in research and development of technology and to do R&D that adheres to the specific standards set forth by medical ethics and bioethics. Although biomedical engineers are not medical practitioners, one could say that they are indirect practitioners, since the technologies and techniques they develop co-determine medical practice.

### General Ethical Issues

In biomedical engineering, a distinction can be made between ethical issues in the R&D practice itself and ethical issues regarding the implications of developed techniques and devices for medical practice. Within R&D there are ethical issues regarding human and animal experimentation and the use of biomaterials, as well as general issues of R&D ethics like truthfulness and the avoidance of conflicts of interest. Next to such issues inherent to their own practice, biomedical engineers have a responsibility to anticipate the consequences of their designs for medical practice and to ensure that technologies and techniques are designed in a manner consistent with and supportive of ethical principles for medical practice. Such principles include beneficence (benefiting patients), nonmaleficence (doing no harm), patient autonomy (the right to choose or refuse treatment), justice (the equitable allocation of scarce health resources), dignity (dignified treatment of patients), confidentiality (of medical information) and informed consent (consent to treatment based on a proper understanding of the facts).

Particular ethical questions arise in relation to *human enhancement*. Whereas the devices and techniques developed by biomedical engineers are usually designed to support therapy or diagnosis, they may also be designed to enhance healthy human traits beyond a normal level. This is called human enhancement, and it is morally controversial because it moves traits beyond boundaries of the human species, and therefore has the potential to create superhumans. If medicine were to engage in human enhancement, it would move beyond its traditional mission, which is merely curative and preventive. Enhancement may even require the impairment of healthy human tissue or organs to fit augmentations. It therefore remains controversial whether biomedical engineers (and medical practitioners) should engage in human enhancement.

Let us now turn to some specific fields of biomedical engineering and consider major ethical issues in them.
