---
images: []
order: 231
title: Cellular, Genetic and Tissue Engineering
---

These fields involve recent attempts to attack biomedical problems at the microscopic level.

*Cellular engineering* is a field that attempts to control cell function through chemical, mechanical, electrical or genetic engineering of cells. It attempts to understand disease processes at the cellular level and to intervene by means of miniature devices that stimulate or inhibit cellular processes at target locations to prevent or treat disease.

*Genetic engineering* specifically aims to control the genetic material in cells. Most research goes into *somatic cell therapy*, which is the genetic modification of bodily cells other than sperm or egg cells in order to replace defective genes with functional ones. It is being clinically tested to treat inheritable diseases, cancer, diabetes and various neurodegenerative disorders. There is now considerable agreement that somatic cell gene therapy to treat serious diseases is ethical.

*Germline engineering*, which is not currently used therapeutically but which is being studied, is a more controversial practice in which genes in eggs, sperm or very early embryos are modified. It is controversial because it leads to inheritable modifications of the genome that are passed on to future generations. The long-term side-effects of such engineering are currently unpredictable, and there are also concerns that such engineering violates the rights of future generations or amounts to "playing God." Also controversial is genetic engineering to enhance human traits such as intelligence or strength, whether practiced on somatic cells or on germline cells. Such genetic enhancement is controversial for the same reasons that apply to other types of human enhancement.

*Tissue engineering* is a field that aims to restore, maintain or improve the functioning of tissues or whole organs by means of biological substitutes that repair or replace these tissues or organs. One of the goals of tissue engineering is to create artificially grown organs for patients that need organ transplants. Tissue engineering strongly depends on cellular engineering as well as on biomaterials science. Major moral controversies in tissue engineering concern the use of *xenogenic* (animal or vegetative) and *human embryonic tissue* (stem and germ cells). The use of xenogenic cells and cell material is controversial because species boundaries are crossed in the process: it involves the creation and medical use of cells and tissues that, by origin, are part human, part animal or plant. The use of embryonic tissue is controversial because cells are harvested from human embryos, which are destroyed in the process, or from aborted fetuses. It has been objected that it is unethical to kill or destroy human embryos and therefore to have a medical practice that involves it, and there are worries that a demand for human embryonic tissue promotes the large-scale cultivation of human embryos specifically for this purpose.

Other ethical issues in tissue engineering concern the question whether and how specific types of tissues can be patented, the question whether human donors of cells should be able to profit from their use (which is currently not the case) and whether donors have a right to informed consent for every use of their cells (which is currently the case). The protection of privacy of donors is another issue. Tissues of donors are stored in so-called biobanks, repositories for the storage of biospecimens that are used for clinical or research purposes. Public and private organizations that own such biobanks are responsible for protecting the privacy and confidentiality of donors, but there are disagreements about the extent and manner to which this should be done. A final ethical issue concerns the question of how to balance the prolonging of life with the quality of life in tissue engineering. To what extent should lengthening the lifespan of humans be a goal of tissue engineering, and how should such a goal be balanced against the goal of improving the quality of life, as these goals may sometimes conflict?
