---
images: []
order: 232
title: Biomaterials, Prostheses and Implants
---

Several biomedical engineering fields have a partial focus on the development of prosthetic devices and implants. In the field of *biomaterials*, which is complementary to tissue engineering, non-biological synthetic or natural materials are developed and used to interface with biological systems to replace, treat, augment or support tissues, organs or functions of the body. The field of biomaterials contributes substantially to the development of prostheses and implants in biomedical engineering. The development and use of prostheses and implants is a major concern of *rehabilitation engineering*, a field concerned with developing technological solutions for problems of people with disabilities and function impairments. Prostheses such as artificial hips, artificial limbs, pacemakers, speech synthesizers and retinal implants are used to restore function.

The use of prostheses and implants raises issues of human identity and dignity because it involves the addition of artificial structures and systems to human biology, or even the replacement of human tissues and organs with artificial versions. The use of prostheses and implants, particularly ones that have functioning parts, makes humans into *cyborgs*: beings that are part human, part machine. Can the resulting person still be called fully human? Can the addition of artificial parts cause a transformation or even a loss of identity? Are humans still autonomous persons when they rely on electronic circuitry in their bodies? Should certain organs or functions not be replaced by artificial systems? In addition, the possibility that prostheses and implants are developed for human enhancement has also met with controversy. A more mundane issue concerns the use of biomedical devices and implants in clinical trials: what conditions must be met for the ethical and responsible testing of new biomaterial and prostheses in humans, and how thoroughly should materials and implants be tested before they go on the market?

### Biomedical Imaging and Optics

Biomedical imaging is the application of engineering methods to detect and visualize biological processes. Biomedical imaging techniques are used clinically, to detect and diagnose diseases, and in basic life sciences research, to study normal anatomy and function. Biomedical imaging is usually non-invasive or minimally invasive and involves the radiation or detection of a known physical quantity, like sound, ultrasound, radiation or magnetism. Electronic data processing and analysis is then used to generate visual images.

Biomedical imaging has obvious benefits for science and healthcare. Concerns have been raised with *diagnostic imaging*, however. It has been worried that imaging for this purpose may lead to an excess of diagnoses. Diseases may be revealed that were not under investigation or for which no therapy is available, or conditions may become visible that indicate an increased probability to develop a disease. This may confront medical specialists and patients with information and (moral) choices they may not wish to have. Patients may not want to know that they have a disease for which no good therapy is available, or be confronted with a painful uncertainty whether they have or could contract a certain disease. This raises moral issues about not only the use but also the design of imaging technologies: should they be designed, for example, so that bodily conditions are made visible selectively?

Moral controversy also extends to *brain imaging*, which is reaching the point that it can reveal information about a person's mental states or plans for action. These developments raise significant privacy concerns and the frightening possibility that mind-reading is used to manipulate and control people.

A third and final ethical issue concerns the ethics of data manipulation in biomedical imaging. Images, whether for clinical study or for scientific analysis, are expected to be truthful and reliable, which requires that no imaging operations are performed that manipulate data and provide false information. Yet some imaging operations, such as brightness and contrast adjustments, are clearly acceptable and sometimes necessary. This raises the question what imaging operations are permissible and to what extent imaging operations must be reported to third parties.

### Neural Engineering

Neural engineering is a new field at the intersection of engineering and neuroscience that uses engineering techniques to study and manipulate the central or peripheral nervous systems. Its goals include the restoration and augmentation of human function. This is usually achieved via direct interactions between the nervous system and artificial devices. In *neuroprosthetics*, neural prostheses are developed that replace or improve neural function of an impaired nervous system. Another area of neural engineering is that of *brain–computer interfaces*, in which external computing devices are hooked up to the brain so that signals can be exchanged. Neural engineering also includes the development of *brain implants* for functional electrical stimulation of nervous tissue to restore function.

Besides involving controversial forms of animal and human subject research, neural engineering has raised ethical questions regarding the integrity and dignity of persons, as artificial neural devices may affect personal identity and make the human mind or brain partially artificial, thus turning humans into cyborgs. In addition, individual autonomy could be undermined as neural devices could be used to control cognition, mood and behavior. This also raises questions of responsibility: can humans still be held morally responsible for their behavior when their brain has been engineered by others to function in a certain way? The possibility of *neuro-enhancement* also raises significant ethical issues: should neural engineering be used to develop artificial devices that allow humans to have superior perception, cognition or motor control, or positive moods and attitudes?

#### References and Further Reading

Fielder, J. (2007). *Biomedical Engineering Ethics* (San Rafael, Calif.: Morgan & Claypool). Varello, D. (2007). *Biomedical Ethics for Engineers: Ethics and Decision Making in Biomedical and Biosystem Engineering* (New York: Academic Press).
