---
images: []
order: 235
title: PAUL B. THOMSON
---

The term "bioethics" is often credited to Van Rensalaer Potter (1911–2001), whose 1971 book *Bioethics: Bridge to the Future* argued that increases in technological power over the human body and the Earth's natural processes make it necessary to develop new normative understandings of biology at organismal, regional and global scales. Potter linked advances in medical technology and nutrition to the rapid growth of human population, foreseeing the need to develop a new domain in ethics that would articulate a conception of ethical responsibility for reproductive processes at a global scale. Potter's conception of bioethics was developed in the context of already thriving debates on population and world hunger in which Garrett Hardin (1915–2003), Paul R. Ehrlich (b. 1938) and Joseph Fletcher (1905–91) were prominent figures. Hardin and Ehrlich took an ecological perspective on population growth, stressing the notion of carrying capacity (the number of individuals in a given species that could be supported by a given region). They noted a tendency for many species to enjoy temporary surges in population that would exceed long-term carrying capacity, leading eventually to widespread diebacks.

The nexus between technology and ethics in these debates is rooted in the views of nineteenth-century philosopher Thomas Malthus (1766–1834), who postulated the law that population would naturally increase at a geometric rate, while technology would increase resource availability at only an arithmetic rate, necessitating human suffering due to starvation, disease and warfare over resources. The twentiethcentury ecological view represented by Hardin and Ehrlich tended to see technological advance – especially in the medical sciences – as a primary cause of population growth. Fletcher adapted utilitarian analyses to social issues such as abortion and euthanasia, using the term "situational ethics" to describe his approach. His role in the population debates was in support of Hardin's view that it was immoral to give food to populations that had already exceeded the technical carrying capacity of their local environment.

These global resource debates of the 1960s and early 1970s were pursued in the work of Hans Jonas (1903–92), who was also a founding figure in bioethics. Jonas's book *The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of an Ethics for the Technological Age* (1984) offered an early statement of the precautionary principle. However, technology's impact on specific medical procedures has proved to be a more enduring model for linking bioethics and technology. Bioethicists have conducted vigorous philosophical debates on the ethical acceptability of procedures such as *in vitro* fertilization, cloning and stem cell research, as well as on drugs (such as misoprostol and mifepristone) that can be used to terminate pregnancy or drug protocols for euthanasia. Each of these procedures has become the subject of debate within the medical profession only in the wake of technological developments that have vastly improved its efficiency and reliability, but the nature or trajectory of technological innovation in medicine has not generally been taken to be a significant theme in these debates. Instead, each procedure has been discussed in terms of the ethical justifiability of the medical end being sought. Technical means have been seen as relevant only to the extent that they involve risks that might offset intended benefits.

For example, *in vitro* fertilization is a procedure that requires a number of distinct technical achievements including ovarian stimulation (a hormonal injection technology), oocyte retrieval (an ultrasound-guided surgical technology), intracytoplasmic sperm injection (a laboratory micromanipulation technology) and embryo transfer (a surgical deployment of flexible plastic catheters), as well as attendant drug, hormone and acupuncture technologies intended to improve success rates. Each of these specific technologies has involved the development of both materials and techniques, but it is only with their combination that so-called "test-tube babies" have become a reality. As such, it is a classic example of what Thomas P. Hughes (1983) has characterized as a technological system supported and developed by networks of actors, as theorized by Michel Callon and Bruno Latour (1981). Within bioethics, however, *in vitro* fertilization is debated primarily either in terms of the ethical acceptability of "bypassing natural conception" (a phrase that implies a clear distinction between nature and technology) or in terms of unintended consequences that are causal consequences of technical means, but that are viewed as having ethical significance largely independent from technical practices in themselves.

Intrinsic objections to *in vitro* fertilization include worries about the moral status of embryos created through intracytoplasmic sperm injection and the fate of embryos that are not eventually implanted through embryo transfer. Concerns about its unnatural character invoke traditional notions of family and motherhood. Debates over unintended consequences begin with birth defects, multiple births and risks to women during research, but move quickly to unequal access to medical technologies and impact on the allocation of scarce resources for medical research and treatment (Heitman 1999). Abortion, euthanasia, end-of-life medicine and stem cells are each associated with an extensive literature recounting both intrinsic objections to the medical goals sought by the procedure and their tendency to view human life or life processes as a means to achieving these ends, as well as an extensive literature weighing risks and benefits of the procedure, including broad social impact on healthcare delivery. This discussion of *in vitro* fertilization is an exemplar for a veritable avalanche of bioethics writings on other technically based medical procedures.

The pattern for framing technological issues in terms of a contrast between intrinsic objections to a technical practice and consequentialist or rights-based analysis of a technology has been especially important as bioethics has moved to consider genetics and the possibility for genetic engineering. Some literature in this domain focuses on specific technical applications such as genetic testing for susceptibility to disease and

the potential for misuse of genetic databases. Here, philosophical analysis may begin with a cost–benefit-style accounting of possible consequences. Benefits include enhanced medical diagnosis and the potential for better risk management, while risks include invasion of privacy, the use of genetic information for discriminatory purposes, and the potential for racial, gender or ethnic stereotyping. As with *in vitro* fertilization, concerns about equitable access are quickly added to this list, but in the case of genetic testing and databases this harm is portrayed as having the potential to inscribe economic inequalities in the genetic characteristics of future generations: the "genetic divide." Philip Kitcher has argued that beneficial applications of genetic technology should be pursued only under the condition that social institutions to mitigate these risks accompany it (Kitcher 1996).

Along with direct germline genetic engineering, such impacts are seen as having such pervasive impact on human nature as to constitute the basis for an intrinsic objection to genetic technology. A 2002 statement from the Vatican holds that "Changing the genetic identity of man as a human person through the production of an infrahuman being is radically immoral." Philosophers such as Mary Midgely (1991), Leon Kass (2001) and Francis Fukuyama (2002) have assembled a battery of arguments intended to suggest that such extensive genetic change in any portion of the human population is intrinsically wrong, whether brought about intentionally or through the cumulative result of otherwise unobjectionable practices. This line of argument is opposed by bioethicists, who view these arguments as similar to protests about the unnatural character of racial mixing, women in the workforce and various forms of sexuality, or as a new form of the genetic determinism that arose in the era of eugenics. In its place, philosophers such as Allan Buchanan, Dan W. Brock, Norman Daniels and Daniel Wikler (2001) have interposed philosophy that draws upon utilitarian and rights-based arguments which claim that, while there must be social policies to guard against abuse, denying access to those desirous or needful of genetic technologies is consistent neither with social utility nor with basic liberty.

In short, medical bioethics has evolved a pattern in which neo-Kantian, religious and tradition-based views of intrinsic value and the natural order are set against more liberal philosophies that utilize either straightforward utilitarian weighing of cost and benefit, on the one hand, or rights-based theories for conceptualizing distributive justice, entitlements or non-interference rights, on the other. While technological innovations and networks may be acknowledged as having given rise to the specific circumstances that stimulate debate, the philosophical terms in which they are conducted are derived from the most venerable philosophical and theological traditions of the modern era. Analysts of ethical issues associated with pharmaceuticals and medical procedures tend to interpret the work that precipitates their debates in terms of *science,* rather than of technology. The implicit assumption is that these technological capabilities exist as forms of knowledge: as theories and beliefs that reside in the mind where they may be held in abeyance awaiting the determination of a discrete ethical inquiry that precedes action. As such, while mainstream medical bioethics has been the site for extended philosophical analysis of specific tools and techniques, practitioners have not engaged in or been much influenced by views on the nature and significance of technology that have derived from the views of technological essentialists such as Martin Heidegger, social theorists such as Karl Marx or Max Weber, or even

the global technological development concerns of their own founding figures such as Potter, Hardin and Jonas, much less more recent work in phenomenology, critical theory and the social construction of technical systems.

This framing has extended beyond the medical bioethics field in philosophical debates over agricultural biotechnology or so-called GMOs, an acronym for "genetically modified organisms," that has been widely used to indicate products of genetic engineering in the agrifood sector. Following the pattern in medical bioethics, philosophical analysis of the debate has interpreted resistance to GMOs as a reflection of intrinsic values and objections to their "unnatural" character. Philosophers such as Michael Reiss and Roger Straughan (1996) or Gregory Pence (2002) regard such concerns as flatly incoherent or at best religious, tradition-bound and often reflecting the same strand of non-reflective conservatism that medical bioethicists associate with unnatural practices in human social or sexual practice. Mary Midgely (2000) has defended the idea that the "monstrous" nature of these foods is a sufficient reason to oppose them.

In the case of GMOs, however, it may prove more appropriate to see biotechnology as a cluster of techniques and applications that has the ability to mobilize fairly complex networks of actors in pursuit of diverse and potentially fluid social goals. Thus the timing of key innovations in plant transformation coincides with changes in intellectual property law, creating an opportunity for mergers between pharmaceutical companies, agro-chemical companies and seed suppliers, on the one hand, and for active entry into patent activity by non-profit agricultural research agencies, on the other. This consolidation of power precipitated a new alliance among civil society groups focused on consumer, environmental and rural development. This consortium utilized a form of risk-based micro-politics (in the mode described by Ulrich Beck) to mobilize resistance to GMOs as a counterweight to the industry–university alliances forming around the agricultural/pharmaceutical biotechnology complex. On this view, the bioethics of GMOs has little to do with the classic philosophical oppositions of modern philosophy where religious beliefs join the forces of tradition to oppose "unnatural" behavior while progressives utilize consequentialism and human rights to promote enlightenment. Instead, technology mobilizes the formation of networks and counternetworks to produce contingent and inherently unstable dialectics. Only a detailed and empirical study of the actual technical capacities existing within real social contexts can adequately address the ethics of agricultural biotechnology (Thompson 2007).
