---
images: []
order: 238
title: BART GREMMEN
---

Biotechnology can be defined as the science and technology aimed at understanding and using living organisms or parts thereof to improve the organism for specific human uses or to make or modify a product. In this setting, many human activities should be considered part of the realm of biotechnology, but this is too general. So we shall use the more specific term "genetic modification": the science and technology aimed at introducing any alteration of genetic material (DNA or RNA) of an organism by means that could not occur naturally through mating or recombination. The resulting organisms are called transgenic organisms or genetically modified organisms (GMOs).

In 1996 the first genetically modified crops appeared, thirteen years after the first description of this technology. This year in countries like the US, China and India more than 85 million hectares are covered with genetically modified crops, like soya, cotton and maize. The total market value is estimated to be \$4.5 billion. The first GMO crops, developed by Monsanto, were resistant against the herbicide of this company. Nowadays there are also all kinds of insect- and virus-resistant crops in many parts of the world with the exception of Europe. Transgenic animals are used in medical research, and there are only a few examples of transgenic animals in agriculture (for example transgenic salmon), while there is a worldwide ban on transgenic humans.

Only within the last few decades, developing transgenic organisms has become routine and has raised a lot of ethical concerns. Because genetic modification may be used in different kinds of agriculture, it will have to face all the ethical, moral, social and technical issues associated with agriculture in general. Genetic modification contributes to important societal values like sustainability, biodiversity and health. This is done by research on drought and salt resistance, the reduction of pesticides and viruses. Basic ethical questions are about intrinsic value, environmental and health risks, and the problem of human hunger and benefit-sharing.

### Intrinsic Value

Fundamental ethical concerns of biotechnology, like respect for nature, and naturalness, often are called "intrinsic" because genetic engineering of organisms is thought to be problematic in itself. Intrinsic value refers to the qualities of life, freedom and health. Therefore it belongs to the deontological part of ethics in which general values serve as principles. During the last agricultural crises involving animals in Europe, like BSE and pig diseases, many groups in society criticized the policy of the government and the EU using their own version of intrinsic value. The concept is now also applied in discussions on the genetic modification of plants, where it is invoked to criticize genetic modification. For example, the adherents of organic agriculture consider the introduction of transgenic material in a plant as a violation of its intrinsic value.

The concept of intrinsic value, formerly strictly reserved for humans, is only recently well established in animal ethics. The concept means that animals have an ethical status, a value of their own, independent of the instrumental value for humans. In the Netherlands the concept of intrinsic value is even incorporated in the law on the protection of animals. Without the intrinsic value of nature, environmental ethics becomes a particular application of human-to-human ethics. In this traditional kind of ethics the term "intrinsic value" is used to refer to certain conscious experiences of humans, and is thus anthropocentric. In this view there is a central difference between humans and non-humans: only humans have moral relevance, and everything else has instrumental value.

Warwick Fox argues that it makes a huge practical difference when we grant intrinsic value to nature. In that case the burden of proof would shift from the conservationists to the people who are destroying nature. People would have to go to court seeking permission, for example, to fell trees. As a consequence, people would also have to seek permission to perform activities like genetic modification. With the rise of environmental ethics at the end of the 1960s, the term "intrinsic value" was also applied to the so-called "higher" animals (closest to humans) that also have a conscious awareness because they can experience pain. That is why humans only need to show respect to sentient animals and also why animal husbandry that makes use of transgenic animals violates the intrinsic value of animals. Because plants are not sentient animals, it is also in this view impossible for plant biotechnology to violate the intrinsic value of plants. The next step in the development of the concept of intrinsic value is an enlargement of the domain of intrinsic value to all living beings. In this extreme view, shared only by a minority of people, intrinsic value is an absolute value, without degrees, and not connected to subjective human experience. This means that all GM activities in agriculture would violate the intrinsic value of all living beings in those activities.

### Environmental and Health Risks

Straughan refers to ethical concerns about the consequences of the development and use of genetically modified organisms, like environmental risks and health risks, as "extrinsic" concerns. They belong to the teleological part of ethics which focuses on the consequences of our actions. At the moment there is global consensus that the environment deserves moral consideration. The environmental risks are about the release of GMOs in the field. Some people have called this "genetic pollution" because of the possible transgenic gene flow into farming and natural environments. The use of herbicide-resistant crops has led to questions about the effects of herbicide residues and the possibility of the development of "killer" weeds that have become resistant to

herbicides. The use of male sterility in crops could reduce the gene flow into the environment. This would also help organic agriculture in its struggle to remain free of GMOs, because, surrounded by GMO fields, it is difficult for organic farmers to guarantee consumers a free choice between organic and GM products. Also, in the case of transgenic animals, gene flow into the wild population is likely to occur when the net fitness of, for example, a transgenic fish is equal to or higher than the net fitness of a wild mate. May we allow a lasting genetic effect on wild animals? Kaiser even describes the so-called "Trojan gene scenario" which suggests that enhanced mating success coupled to reduced adult viability would result in a rapid decline of the wild population. The number of uncertainties about the environmental effects in these debates is high, and the assessment of these risks entails an implicit value stance. According to Kaiser, this follows directly from what kind of harm one is willing to test for and implies that the methods employed necessarily display some kind of bias. The kind of need that is satisfied, and who benefits, are crucial aspects for ethical acceptance. Although people expect a certain level of safety for GM animals, other considerations, like medical benefits for humans, often prevail over animal welfare.

### Human Hunger and Benefit-sharing

According to some calculations, the world population will have grown to 10 billion people in 2050, while at the moment there is food for 6.4 billion people. The demand for more variety in food will increase in China and India, and also 42 percent of the crops will be lost because of pests, drought, salt, heat and cold. Genetically modified organisms could be one of the important ways to meet this challenge, by using the same amount of land in worsened circumstances. In this respect, genetic modification may be called a global technology. Individual countries cannot develop and use this technology on their own. International cooperation and networks are necessary to keep the development of this technology going. Countries will have to make large long-term investments to participate in genetic modification, and Third World countries will not be able to participate.

There are two conditions that have to be fulfilled in order for Third World countries to be able to join genetic modification: the building of an infrastructure and the ownership of genetic resources. The poor countries cannot fulfill the first condition because their very restricted budget does not allow equipping laboratories with advanced and expensive computers and all kinds of machines. Although many poor countries have abundant genetic resources, they are not able to profit because these genetic resources also are present in other countries (like potato and tomato in the Andes), and there are also large collections of genetic resources in the gene-banks of the developed world. In debates on the protection of biodiversity, the Third World countries keep insisting on a fair compensation for the use of "their" genetic resources. An international treaty of 2004 (FAO) regulates the compensation in case of patents, but in the case of "breeders' rights" there are still ethical questions like: What is the benefit of the farmers when they have the right to use the seeds of the companies in the West and they lack the specific knowledge and means to use these seeds in their plant-breeding? If these farmers cannot develop seeds of their own, can they use the seeds from the biotechnology industry? This is often difficult because genetic modification, until now, has only developed seeds that are important in the economy of the West and not local "orphan" seeds that are important in Third World countries.

### References and Further Reading

- Burkhardt, J. (2000). "Agricultural Biotechnology, Ethics, Family Frames, and Industrialization," in T. Murray and M. Mehlman (eds), *Encyclopedia of Ethical, Legal and Policy Issues in Biotechnology* (New York: John Wiley).
- Fox, W. (1993). "What Does the Recognition of Intrinsic Value Entail?," in *Trumpeter*, 10.
- Gremmen, B. (2005). "Genomics and the Intrinsic Value of Plants," *Genomics, Society and Policy*, 1 (3).
- Kaiser, M. (2005). "Assessing Ethics and Animal Welfare in Animal Biotechnology for Farm Production," in *OIE Scientific and Technical Review*, 24 (1): 75–87.
- Straughan, R. (1991). "Social and Ethical Issues Surrounding Biotechnological Advance," in *Outlook on Agriculture*, 20: 89–94.
- Thompson, P. B. (1998). *Food Biotechnology in Ethical Perspective* (London: Blackie Academic).
