---
images: []
order: 241
title: PHILIP BREY
---

Computer ethics is a new field of applied ethics that addresses ethical issues in the use, design and management of information technology and in the formulation of ethical policies for its regulation in society. For contemporary overviews of the field, see Tavani (2007), Weckert (2007), Spinello and Tavani (2004), and Himma and Tavani (2007). Computer ethics, which has also been called *cyberethics*, emerged in the 1980s, together with the rise of the personal computer. Early work in the field, however, had already started in the 1940s, soon after the invention of the computer. The birth of computer ethics as a field is often fixed at 1985, the year that saw the appearance of seminal publications by Jim Moor (1985) and Deborah Johnson (1985). The field is sometimes also defined to be a part of a more general field of *information ethics*, which includes computer ethics, media ethics, library ethics and bio-information ethics.

Why would there be a need for computer ethics, while there is no need for a separate field of ethics for many other technologies, like automobiles and appliances? Jim Moor (1985) has argued that the computer has had an impact like no other recent technology. The computer seems to impact every sector of society, and seems to require us to rethink many of our policies, laws and behaviors. According to Moor, this great impact is due to the fact that computers have *logical malleability*, meaning that their structure allows them to perform any activity that can be specified as a logical relation between inputs and outputs. Many activities can be specified in this way, and the computer therefore turns out to be an extremely powerful and versatile machine that can perform an incredible amount of functions, from word processor to communication device to gaming platform to financial manager.

The versatility of computers is an important reason for the occurrence of a computer revolution, or information revolution, that is now transforming many human activities and social institutions. Many important things that humans do, including many that raise moral questions like stealing from someone, defaming someone, or invading someone's privacy, now also exist in electronic form. In addition, the computer also makes substantially new types of activities possible that are morally controversial, such as the creation of virtual child pornography for which no real children were abused. Because many of the actions made possible by computers are different and new, we often lack policies and laws to guide them. They generate what Moor has called *policy vacuums*, being the lack of clear policies or rules of conduct. The task of computer ethics, then, is to propose and develop new ethical policies, ranging from explicit laws to informal guidelines, to guide new types of actions that involve computers.

Computer ethics has taken off since its birth in the mid-1980s, and has established itself as a mature field with its own scientific journals, conferences and organizations. The field initially attracted most interest from computer scientists and philosophers, with many computer science curricula nowadays requiring a course or module on computer ethics. However, given the wide implications for human action sketched by Moor, computer ethics is also of interest to other fields that focus on human behavior and social institutions, such as law, communication studies, education, political science and management. Moreover, computer ethics is also an important topic of debate in the public arena, and computer ethicists regularly contribute to public discussions regarding the use and regulating of computer technology.
