---
images: []
order: 242
title: Approaches in Computer Ethics
---

Computer ethics is sometimes defined as a branch of *professional ethics* similar to other branches like engineering ethics and journalism ethics. On this view, the aim of computer ethics is to define and analyze the moral and professional responsibilities of computer professionals. *Computer professionals* are individuals employed in the information technology branch, for example as hardware or software engineer, web designer, network or database administrator, computer science instructor or computer-repair technician. Computer ethics, on this view, should focus on the various moral issues that computer professionals encounter in their work, for instance in the design, development and maintenance of computer hardware and software.

Within this approach to computer ethics, most attention goes to the discussion of ethical dilemmas that various sorts of computer professionals may face in their work and possible ways of approaching them. Such dilemmas may include, for example, the question how one should act as a web designer when one's employer asks one to install spyware into a site built for a client, or the question to what extent software engineers should be held accountable for harm incurred by software malfunction. Next to the discussion of specific ethical dilemmas, there is also general discussion of the responsibilities of computer professionals toward various other parties, such as clients, employers, colleagues and the general public, and of the nature and importance of ethical codes in the profession. A recent topic of interest has been the development of methods for *value-sensitive design*, which is the design of software and systems in such a way that they conform to a desired set of (moral) values (Friedman, Kahn and Borning 2006).

While the professional ethics view of computer ethics is important, many in the field employ a broader conception that places the focus on general ethical issues in the use and regulation of information technology. This approach may be called the *philosophical ethics* approach to computer ethics. This conception holds, following Moor (1985), that computer ethics studies moral issues that are of broad societal importance, and develops ethical policies to address them. Such policies may regulate the conduct of organizations, groups and individuals, and the workings of institutions. The philosophical approach focuses on larger social issues like information privacy and

security, computer crime, issues of access and equity, and the regulation of commerce and speech on the Internet. It asks what ethical principles should guide our thinking about these issues, and what specific policies (laws, social and corporate policies, social norms) should regulate conduct with respect to them.

Although most ethical commentary in the philosophical approach is directed to the *use* of computers by individuals and organizations, attention has also started to be paid to systems and software *themselves*, as it has been recognized that these are not morally neutral but contain values and biases in their design that must also be analyzed. Approaches that emphasize this angle include *values in design* approaches (Nissenbaum 1998) and *disclosive computer ethics* (Brey 2000). Another development in the field that is of more recent origin is the emergence of *inter-cultural information ethics* (Capurro 2007), which attempts to compare and come to grips with the vastly different moral attitudes and behaviors that exist toward information and information technology in different cultures.

### Topics in Computer Ethics

#### *Privacy*

Privacy is a topic that has received much attention in computer ethics from early on. Information technology is often used to record, store and transmit personal information, and it may happen that this information is accessed or used by third parties without the consent of the corresponding persons, thus violating their privacy. Privacy is the right of persons to control access to their personal affairs, such as their body, thoughts, private places, private conduct, and personal information about themselves. The most attention in computer ethics has gone to *information privacy*, which is the right to control the disclosure of personal data. Information technology can easily be used to violate this right.

Privacy issues play, amongst others, on the Internet, where cookies, spyware, browsertracking and access to the records of Internet providers may be used to study the Internet behavior of individuals or to get access to their PCs. Privacy issues also play in the construction of databases with personal information by corporations and government organizations, and the merging of such databases to create complex records about persons or to find matches across databases. Other topics of major concern include the privacy implications of video surveillance and biometric technologies, and the ethics of medical privacy and privacy at work. It has also been studied whether people have a legitimate expectation to privacy in public areas or whether they can be freely recorded, screened and tracked whenever they appear in public.

#### *Security and crime*

Security has become a major issue in computer ethics, because of rampant computer crime and fraud, the spread of computer viruses, malware and spam, and national security concerns about the status of computer networks as breeding grounds for terrorist activity and as vulnerable targets for terrorist attacks. Computer security is

the protection of computer systems against the unauthorized disclosure, manipulation or deletion of information and against denial of service. Breaches of computer security may cause harms and rights violations, including economic losses, personal injury and death, which may occur in so-called safety-critical systems, and violations of privacy and intellectual property rights.

Much attention goes to the moral and social evaluation of computer crime and other forms of disruptive behavior, including *hacking* (non-malicious break-ins into systems and networks), *cracking* (malicious break-ins), *cybervandalism* (disrupting the operations of computer networks or corrupting data), *software piracy* (the illegal reproduction or dissemination of proprietary software) and *computer fraud* (the deception for personal gain in online business transactions by assuming a false online identity or by altering or misrepresenting data). Another recently important security-related issue is how state interests in monitoring and controlling information infrastructures the better to protect against terrorist attacks should be balanced against the right to privacy and other civil rights (Nissenbaum 2005).

#### *Free expression and content control*

The Internet has become a very important medium for the expression of information and ideas. This has raised questions about whether there should be content control or censorship of Internet information, for example by governments or service providers. Censorship could thwart the right to free expression, which is held to be a basic right in many nations. Free expression includes both freedom of speech (the freedom to express oneself through publication and dissemination) and freedom of access to information.

Several types of speech have been proposed as candidates for censorship. These include pornography and other obscene forms of speech, hate speech such as websites of fascist and racist organizations, speech that can cause harm or undermine the state, such as information on how to build bombs, speech that violates privacy or confidentiality, and libelous and defamatory speech. Studies in computer ethics focus on the permissibility of these types of speech, and on the ethical aspects of different censorship methods, such as legal prohibitions and software filters.

#### *Equity and access*

The information revolution has been claimed to exacerbate inequalities in society, such as racial, class and gender inequalities, and to create a new, digital divide, in which those who have the skills and opportunities to use information technology effectively reap the benefits while others are left behind. In computer ethics, it is studied how both the design of information technologies and their embedding in society could increase inequalities, and how ethical policies may be developed that result in a fairer and more just distribution of their benefits and disadvantages. This research includes ethical analyses of the accessibility of computer systems and services for various social groups, studies of social biases in software and systems design, normative studies of education in the use of computers, and ethical studies of the digital gap between industrialized and developing countries.

### *Intellectual property*

Intellectual property is the name for information, ideas, works of art and other creations of the mind for which the creator has an established proprietary right of use. Intellectual property laws exist to protect creative works by ensuring that only the creators benefit from marketing them or making them available, be they individuals or corporations. Intellectual property rights for software and digital information have generated much controversy. There are those who want to ensure strict control of creators over their digital products, whereas others emphasize the importance of maintaining a strong public domain in cyberspace, and argue for unrestricted access to electronic information and for the permissibility of copying proprietary software. In computer ethics, the ethical and philosophical aspects of these disputes are analyzed, and policy proposals are made for the regulation of digital intellectual property in its different forms.

### Moral Responsibility

Society strongly relies on computers. It relies on them for correct information, for collaboration and social interaction, for aid in decision-making, and for the monitoring and execution of tasks. When computer systems malfunction or make mistakes, harm can be done, in terms of loss of time, money, property, opportunities, or even life and limb. Who is responsible for such harms? Computer professionals, end-users, employers, policy-makers and others could all be held responsible for particular harms. It has even been argued that intelligent computer systems can bear moral responsibility themselves. In computer ethics, it is studied how the moral responsibility of different actors can be defined, and what kinds of decisions should be delegated to computers to begin with. It is studied how a proper assignment of responsibility can minimize harm and allows for attributions of accountability and liability.
