---
images: []
order: 249
title: THOMAS KESSELRING
---

Development aid policy (DAP) takes place at the point of intersection of a number of ethical issues:

- (1) What does "development" mean and in which direction does it point?
- (2) What purpose does development cooperation (DC) have, what role do rights and obligations play, and what motives is it based on?
- (3) Who has to support whom with development aid?
- (4) Which goals should development aid policy aim at?

This article leaves aside issues about individual development and about pedagogy (i.e. concerted support of individual development) and concentrates on DAP.

At (1). Involvements in development cooperation presuppose a gradient between the cooperating groups. Members of a society considered higher developed (donor) support one or more groups of a society considered less developed (recipient). The aim of the support is to minimize the development deficit. In practice the question then arises who defines direction and aim of the development process. From an ethical as well as a practical standpoint, it stands to reason that the groups involved take joint action. DC in the strict sense presupposes a symmetrical relation and a joint decision-making process. Otherwise the relation is asymmetrical (i.e. "development aid"), and the recipients remain heteronomous. For instance, development aid based on conditions is asymmetrical.

Development is frequently equated with economic growth and judged by the gross national product (The World Bank: World Development Reports). Accordingly, development means increase in material prosperity by construction of an industrial service sector as well as political – particularly democratic – institutions. This conception competes with two others which were introduced more recently: (*a*) in 1990 the development program of the UN created a subtly differentiated index for *human development* (United Nations Development Program, UNDP) based on several factors – namely (i) gross national product per person (as an indicator of living standard), (ii) life expectancy (in which healthcare, nutrition and hygiene find expression), and (iii) rate of primary school enrolment and rate of literacy (expressing educational level); (*b*) The concept of sustainable development was introduced into the discussion

in 1987, when the Brundtland report (World Commission on Environment and Development 1987: ch. 1, § 27) was published. Sustainable development "ensure[s] that it meets the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs." Because technology and lifestyle of industrial nations do not meet this definition, the level of development of these nations loses its exemplary character. The realization of the development aid policy program of the 1960s, scheduled for all "underdeveloped" countries, that they should catch up on the development would inevitably lead to ecological collapse. The task of bringing together human development and sustainable development remains a challenge for all societies – especially for those societies that are highest developed according to the old definition.

At (2). DC has been subject to ethical discussions time and time again since the 1960s. At first criticism concerned the non-intended side-effects of DC: it is not free of corruption, it makes the partners dependent, and presenting Western lifestyle awakens their craving for emigration (Kesselring 2003: ch. 11). But ethical controversy has also broken out about the aim of DC itself. In this controversy, four positions can be distinguished:

- (*a*) The adherents of the first evaluate DC positively on ethical grounds, but hold that nobody is obliged to participate in DC. This means at the same time that no underdeveloped society has a legally enforceable right to foreign help. Somebody who helps others is admittedly doing something good and praiseworthy, according to a (supererogatory) virtue, but he does not thereby follow a moral imperative. This goes well with the fact that the UN recommendation to the industrial nations in the 1960s to spend at least 0.7 percent of their GNP on DC never was obligatory and very few countries complied with it. Most of the countries confined themselves to half of this quota and even cut back their commitment further during the 1990s. Motives for voluntary commitment to DC are, e.g., *solidarity*, *charitable attitude* or *sympathy for the disadvantaged* (cf. "option for the poor" acknowledged by the Latin American bishops' conference at their general assembly in Medellin in 1968).
- (*b*) According to a second position, it is the obligation of prosperous societies (or their citizens) to become committed to the relief of poverty or to make financial contributions to development cooperation. This obligation conforms to a moral (but not legally enforceable) right of the disadvantaged for assistance. This thesis is advocated by utilitarian (Singer 1979, Unger 1996) as well as non-utilitarian oriented authors (Pogge 1987). The most radical views are defended by Singer and Unger, who classify failure to give assistance as murder. This opinion is not held by any party in the practice of development policy. At best the practice of church welfare organizations in some countries comes close to it. According to O'Neill (1986) and Rawls (1999), in the end no private individual but rather states are obligated to DC.
- (*c*) A utilitarian view opposed to (b) is held by the biologist Hardin (1977): development aid should be omitted, because its results are counterproductive: By stimulating population growth in poor countries, it contributes to making the situation for the next generation(s) considerably worse than it is today. However, since the 1970s this thesis has become outdated: first, because family planning itself

- constitutes a primary concern of many development aid programs; and, second, since many governments of receiving countries actively pursue a population control policy often carried through more rigorously if they themselves take the initiative than if they are forced to do so by external financial backers.
- (*d*) Today's most common position is a fourth: There is neither an obligation to DC nor to its omission. Nevertheless there are a number of rational motives for becoming involved in development aid policy which are based on well-understood personal interests. For instance, DC opens up new markets. During the Cold War, DC also served Western powers and Eastern-bloc states to extend or consolidate their political power. Today some multinational companies, too, invest – directly or via foundations – in development aid programs and humanitarian projects. Such investments have a positive impact on the image of the firm, although the contributions are often plainly under 0.7 percent of the net profit.

Development aid policy does also become more and more significant in the context of "Global Governance." In particular, it is of increasing importance for coping with a series of challenges that rich as well as poor nations face equally, such as ecological crisis, climate change, atomic radiation, AIDS, risks of unstable financial markets, and terrorism. These challenges depict factual constraints which relativize the significance of national borders, reduce the latitude of national politics, and restrict the sovereignty of states (Messner et al. 2005). A growing number of problems individual states are facing – pressure by migration, unemployment, weather damage conditioned by climate change, drinking-water shortage – demand also for their solution a coordinated international effort ("*Global Governance*"). Obviously, poor nations have to be involved in the collective fight against world problems, too. Development aid policy has especially to be orientated toward them – though without focusing only upon those poor countries from which the largest contributions to the solution of international problems are to be expected.

At (3). Agents within development aid policy are usually either states or nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), clerical or other religious groups or private persons.

Many industrial nations maintain very close corporate relations regarding development aid policy to certain developing countries. The choice of those countries normally does not provoke any ethical debates. Notwithstanding aid does apply selectively – despite the universal validity of the demand to help. If there occurs urgent need of help somewhere, the UN with its organs usually gets active, and often a lot of governments commit themselves spontaneously, but often these initiatives are driven by national interests. After the tsunami catastrophe of 26 December 2004 the Western donor countries almost competed with each other regarding the amount of their donations. Nine months later, however, after the earthquake in Islamic Pakistan (October 2005) the necessary money hardly came in.

It is more likely that people are willing to help their family members or close relatives than non-related persons, even if the latter are much more in need of help. It is no coincidence that, in the parable, the Samaritan who came to the assistance of a Jew who had been assaulted, and rendered him first aid, even though he himself was a member of a group of ethnical foreigners, is portrayed as exemplary and worthy of

admiration (Luke 10: 29–37). Apparently it already surpassed customary practice and expectations in those days. Something similar is valid for redistribution: in small, manageable groups or societies with strong community spirit it is easier to enforce than in pluralistic societies without a clear unity. Redistribution of goods across national borders is even less capable of consensus, since a common conception of justice is often missing (Walzer 1994). Involvement in development aid policy is therefore more likely capable of obtaining a majority if it applies to groups related ethnically, close trading partners or allies.

At (4). For DAP a clarification of prioritized goals is perempting. Rawls addressed this issue in two of his latest papers (1993, 1999). In particular, he formulated a *principle of assistance* stressing that the obligation to support disadvantaged societies is restricted to the establishment of conditions in agreement with human rights. This principle corresponds to the first of three criteria of justice which he proposed as part of national-state rules – a system of equal fundamental rights and liberties for everyone guaranteed by the society or state. At an international level, this criterion is satisfied if all states respect the human rights – or at least its hard kernel. Obtaining this goal, though, presupposes states with an assertive government and with financial resources sufficient to carry out the corresponding tasks. According to Rawls, international support aimed at increasing prosperity beyond the protection of fundamental rights cannot be the goal of development aid.

At the international level, Rawls attaches no significance to the principle of difference (stating that of two social orders the one is more just in which the group of disadvantaged is better off ). He gives two reasons for this: On the one hand, not all states agree with this principle and, on the other hand, material aid or redistribution of goods is only demanded if it is required in order to establish a social order guaranteeing elementary human rights for everyone. For instance, from a society which has achieved prosperity by means of successful demographic measures we cannot demand that it has to make financial contributions to another society which consciously has refrained from family planning and for that reason has remained poor (Rawls 1999: 118). Such aid would be counterproductive and unsuitable for changing the causes of poverty.

Rawls also denies equality of opportunity (i.e. his second criterion for social justice) to have any significance at the international level. This is related to the fact that he conceives international economic relations one-sidedly as a cooperative system and does not take into account that economic exchange takes place on the basis of a global (ousting) competition and, moreover, that the power of decision-making with respect to political issues is distributed unequally. Beitz (1985) and Pogge (1989) therefore demand that we should hold on to the principle of equality of opportunity at the international level, too. This principle could indeed get relevant at two places: (*a*) when decisions on concerns of global interest are at stake, and (*b*) in the case of integrating individual countries into the world economy. If it is admitted that not all states can have the same influence on decisions regarding the regulation of international concerns and affecting all human beings, then the principle of difference may be applied for establishing different degrees of international justice: the better the chances are that even the weakest states (presupposing that their governments convincingly represent the interests of the people) can make themselves heard and their legitimate interests

are taken into account, the more just is the political world order. And, analogically, the better the integration of the economically weakest countries into the world market, the more just is the economic world order (Kesselring 2006).

The attitude of Amartya Sen (1999) to development aid policy is directed more strongly toward the needs of the involved people than Rawls's. Sen has criticized Rawls for restricting transnational obligations toward development aid policy to the aim of (re-)establishing a system of human rights. Persons, Sen demands, must have at their disposal the abilities and the material prerequisites that are necessary for exercising their fundamental rights. For instance, a paralytic person cannot exercise her freedom of movement unless she has means of transport at her disposal. Hence she is in need of more resources than non-disabled persons. This example can be generalized. The fundamental right, say, to get an education is only beneficial for the person concerned when there exist schools within reach and when the way to school is safe. Moreover, fundamental rights are only of use if they are legally recoverable – this needs efficient executive bodies, incorruptible attorneys, fair courts, competent legal advice, and the access to these services has to be affordable for everyone. Development means for Sen something like an expansion of freedoms (cf. the title of his major work, *Development as Freedom*). Contrary to Latin American liberation theology, Sen understands "freedom" not only in the negative sense as the absence of obstacles but also positively as the disposal of "capabilities," i.e. abilities, knowledge, information, social influence, access to resources and infrastructure. The most important *capability* is selfdetermination – it is an indispensable precondition for the responsible use of all other abilities and fundamental rights. Obviously the acquisition of these special abilities is even more demanding than the protection of Western fundamental rights.

#### References and Further Reading

Beitz, Charles (1985). "Justice and International Relations," in Charles Beitz et al. (eds), *International Ethics: A Philosophy and Public Affairs Reader* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press). Hardin, Garrett (1977). "Lifeboat Ethics: The Case against Helping the Poor," in William Aiken and Hugh La Follette (eds), *World Hunger and Moral Obligation* (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall); 2nd edn, *World Hunger and Morality* (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall 1996).

Kesselring, Thomas (2003). *Ethik der Entwicklungspolitik* (Munich: Beck).

Kesselring, Thomas (2006). "Entwicklungshilfe und Entwicklungspolitik aus ethischer Perspektive," in Hartmut Ihne and Jürgen Wilhelm (eds), *Einführung in die Entwicklungspolitik* (Münster: LIT), pp. 323–45.

Messner, Dirk et al. (eds) (2005). *Zukunftsfragen der Entwicklungspolitik* (Baden-Baden: Nomos). O'Neill, Onara (1986). *Faces of Hunger. An Essay on Poverty, Justice, and Development* (London: Allen & Unwin).

Pogge, Thomas (1989). *Realizing Rawls* (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press).

Pogge, Thomas (1997). "A Global Resources Dividend," in David Crocker and Toby Linden (eds), *Ethics of Consumption: The Good Life, Justice, and Global Stewardship* (Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield).

Rawls, John (1993). "The Law of Peoples," in Stephan Shute and Susan Hurley (eds), *On Human Rights* (New York: Basic Books).

Rawls, John (1999). *The Law of Peoples* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).

Sen, Amartya (1999). *Development as Freedom* (New York: Knopf ).

Singer, Peter (1979). *Practical Ethics* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Unger, Peter (1996). *Living High and Letting Die* (New York: Oxford University Press).

United Nations Development Program (UNDP). *Human Development Report*. Appears annually (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Walzer, Michael (1994). *Thick and Thin: Moral Argument at Home and Abroad* (Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press).

The World Bank. *World Development Report*. Appears annually (Oxford: Oxford University Press). World Commission on Environment and Development (1987). *Our Common Future* (Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press).
