---
images: []
order: 253
title: Energy and Economic Growth
---

Energy is a key production factor, and empirical research confirms this role (Halsnæs and Garg 2006). Based on this, developing countries today have energy security in terms of reliable supply and low costs as a major policy priority. However, energy security is challenged by the volatility of international oil markets, and by international requests for cleaner energy sources in order to prevent global warming and other environmental impacts. These international requests could imply depressed energy supply and increasing costs if domestic sources like coal are excluded. Seen in relation to the perspective of energy access and affordability of private consumers, environmental concerns can be in conflict with energy demand. It is here important to recognize that in particular low-income households presently have low energy access, so there is a special equity dimension related to access. Furthermore, energy expenditures are a relatively high share of household expenditures of low-income families, which can make it controversial to increase energy costs seen from an equity perspective (Halsnæs and Garg 2006).

A utility-based equity approach would in this context focus on the welfare consequences of increased energy consumption at macro-economic level and in relation to households. These consequences can be measured in terms of GDP impacts, and costs and benefits to households and companies of increased energy consumption versus the costs and benefits of environmental impacts. Altogether, this will provide an estimate of whether there is a net social1 deficit or gain of increased energy consumption. Based on the distribution of the consequences, equity arguments could be used to suggest that the ones that gain from increased energy consumption should compensate those that suffer from environmental impacts. Such a principle is sometimes talked about as "the polluter pays principle."

A right-based approach differently could argue that a given energy consumption per capita is a basic right, and people living in developing countries should be allowed to increase their consumption, and thereby their pollution, up to a certain level before they are forced to take environmental targets. Several suggestions have been forwarded along this line of thinking in relation to global warming and energy consumption including the basic needs approach and equal per capita emission rights.

In terms of capabilities, energy access can be understood as an option that should be available to individuals, but the equity outcome of the availability will depend on the capability of the individuals to use the energy and the role it plays in his/her well-being. Among other factors, this will depend on the education, possibilities for income generation and employment, and on the availability of various energy-consuming technologies.
