---
images: []
order: 257
title: 1. The Birth of a Discipline
---

Engineering ethics is an academic research field which can be first traced back to the United States at the end of the 1970s. In this specific context, this discipline has taken its roots in a former ethical reflection developed by professional organizations. Following the model of the British Institute of Civil Engineers, the American associations drafted numerous "codes of ethics" at the beginning of the twentieth century (AICE in 1911, AiChE and AIEE in 1912, ASME and ASCE in 1914). They also attempted, unsuccessfully, to reach an agreement on a common text. In the middle of the 1970s, most of them converged on the code put forward by the Engineers' Council for Professional Development (now the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology [ABET]).

The end of the 1970s marked a turning-point for engineering ethics, thanks to the financial support of the National Science Foundation (NSF), which allowed the creation of teams made up of philosophers and engineers. These teams achieved the first specialized conferences (CSEP of the Illinois Institute of Technology in 1982: Weil 1983), published manuals (Baum and Flores 1978, Schaub and Pavlovic 1983, Martin and Schinzinger 1983–95, Harris et al. 1995, Whitbeck 1998) and essays (Unger 1994, Davis 1998). They put on line many codes of ethics (CSEP) as well as case studies for pedagogical use (Murdough Center of Texas A&M University 1992, CSES Western Michigan University 1995). The NSF also contributed to the creation of a website which has become a reference in the domain (onlineethics.org).

This discipline also developed outside the United States. In Canada, where professional ethics has the force of law, several works were published with the support of the professional associations: the Engineers' Order of Quebec (Racine et al. 1991) and the provincial Association of Ontario (Andrews and Kemper 1999). In France (and in Europe more generally), the publications are more recent than in North America: *Ethique industrielle* (Didier et al. 1998) is a collection of classic and original texts and case studies selected by a fellowship of teachers and engineers. It prolongs the reflection conducted in the form of an essay by an engineer and philosopher who had discovered the field of engineering ethics in the USA (Hériard Dubreuil 1997). Books are also published in other European countries such as Spain and the Netherlands.

Several projects supported by the European Commission (SOCRATES program) have led to the organization of conferences (European Ethics Network since 1996) and the publication of works (Goujon and Hériard Dubreuil 2001). One of the chapters of *Philosophy in Engineering* (Christensen and al. 2007), also an outcome of a SOCRATES program, explicitly concerns engineering ethics.

With regard to research, the presence of active teams, particularly in the Netherlands at the 3TU Ethics and Technology Center (www.ethicsandtechnology.eu), can be noted. In France, the major work of the CETS researchers of the Institut Catholique d'Arts et Métiers (www.cets.groupe-icam.fr) bears upon technical democracy. Those of the ethics department of the Université Catholique de Lille (www.univ-catholille.fr) also take an interest in the articulation between engineers' ethics, sustainable development and corporate social responsibility. In Japan, one can find evidence of the emergence of the discipline in view of the participation of Jun Fudano and others scholars in international conferences such as the one organized in 1999 in Cleveland by Caroline Whitbeck, and more recently the WPE (Workshop on Philosophy and Engineering) organized by the Delft Technology University in the Netherlands. The works of Martin and Schinzinger, Harris et al., and also Whitbeck were translated in Japan. Several works were also published by Japanese authors (Saito and Sakashita 2001, Ohnuki et al. 2002, Nakamura 2003).

Concerning publications, we can quote the presence of articles on engineering ethics in professional journals of engineers (*IEEE Technology and Society Magazine*) or related to engineers' training (ASEE's *Journal of Engineering Education*, SEFI's *European Journal of Engineering Education*, the journal of the *Japanese Society of Engineering Education*) and in journals on general ethics (*Journal of Business Ethics*, EEN's *Ethical Perspective*). Since 1995, many articles have been published in *Science and Enginering Ethics*.

If the existence of a more and more visible active scientific community can be pointed out, engineering ethics as an academic discipline remains underestimated, criticized or even disputed. Technologies can raise moral problems to the society (this is not much questioned) without posing any to the engineers who contribute to their development.
