---
images: []
order: 264
title: 1. Introduction
---

Our use of technology has changed and continues to change the natural environment. While technology – medicine, transportation technologies and information technology and so on – can help us to prosper, there is also no doubt that the production and use of technology can have a negative impact on the environment and therefore on us. The pollution of rivers, oceans and the air poses an immediate threat to the *health* of humans; and the build-up of greenhouse gases, depletion of the ozone layer, and deforestation may each pose a threat, not only to the health of humans, but also to the *survival* of the human species. On the other hand, innovation within technology can also be used to *remove* or *mitigate* some of these man-made threats, and to *minimize the impact* of some non-man-made threats such as huge meteors, volcanoes, earthquakes, tsunamis and diseases.

Our impact on the natural environment, and the way in which this affects humans, other animals and plants, raises important ethical questions. These questions, which are often dealt with under the heading of *environmental ethics*, include: Is human welfare all that matters morally when we evaluate, say, deforestation or the elimination of a species? Should we aim to decrease the number of humans on our planet in order to make other species flourish? Should a company be allowed to open a mine in a national park? What ought we to do about global warming?

The relevance of environmental ethics is obvious. Since the 1960s such ethics have had a more or less strong foothold in most societies. They are now part of the international political agenda, the Kyoto treaty being a clear example here.1 Almost every political party and large company has formulated policies on treatment of the natural environment.2 Furthermore, journals dedicated to environmental ethics have emerged,3 as have NGOs like Greenpeace and Earth First.

Environmental ethics is a multidisciplinary activity. It draws on expertise in physics, biology, economics, law, sociology, psychology and philosophy. Roughly speaking, we can distinguish between *descriptive* and *normative* environmental ethics. The descriptive aim is to describe and explain what attitudes people have to questions like those mentioned above. This part is usually undertaken by sociologists and anthropologists.4 The normative aim is to assess critically the attitudes people have on these issues.5 This task depends on scientific knowledge and philosophical considerations about logic, value theory, normative ethical theory and the clarification of central concepts like those of *welfare*, *value* and *nature*. In line with the title of this *Companion*, the focus in this entry will be on some of the philosophical perspectives on environmental ethics.6 In what follows, then, "environmental ethics" refers to discussions of how humans ought to treat the built and natural environment.7
