---
images: []
order: 265
title: 2. The Axiology of Environmental Ethics
---

Among philosophers and environmentalists, much discussion has centered on the problem of what matters morally in evaluating acts with an impact on the environment. Is it only the *humans* that matter, or is it also *other sentient beings*? Alternatively, should moral concern be extended to *all living things* and perhaps also to *mountains* or even *ecosystems*? These questions concern what we can call the axiology (or value theory) of environmental ethics. At first glance, this endeavor may seem to be of purely academic interest. But it is not. One's view of what matters morally has a critical bearing on the way in which one will argue in discussions about the ethical aspects of pollution, global warming or the extinction of species. To some extent, it affects the conclusions one will reach. For instance, if one believes that all living things have value in themselves, a normative discussion about the preservation of a forest will not be wholly contingent on what effect preservation (or non-preservation) can be expected to have on human welfare.

The axiological literature contains a great variety of positions, but these fall under three general headings: anthropocentrism, sentientism and ecologism. According to *anthropocentrism* (or human-centered ethics),8 only humans have intrinsic value.9 This means that humans should not care directly about non-human entities, although they may care if this will further their own interests (e.g. in respect of welfare or rights). Thus anthropocentrists are only concerned with the non-human part of nature in an *instrumental* way: the pollution of a river is only of moral concern if it sets back the interests of humans; so, if the fish in a river die, that is only morally problematic if people are thereby harmed in some way – e.g. by eating them. Note, however, that it is wrong to assume that anthropocentrism readily justifies the pollution of rivers or the destruction of wilderness – at any rate, as long as we agree (as we surely should) that wilderness can bring humans many deep, lasting and wonderful experiences.

A central challenge for anthropocentrism is to give a convincing answer to the question: Why are humans all that matter? One answer is to say that human welfare is alone in having value in itself because humans have a morally relevant feature that differentiates humans from other beings. That feature might be rationality. The challenges to this kind of answer are many. For instance, it follows from this view that humans who are not rational (newborn infants, people with dementia, etc.) do not have moral value in themselves. Furthermore, some animals, like apes or horses, seem to be more rational than a one-day-old infant, so why not include these animals?

Another answer is to say that only humans have value in themselves, because they belong to the species *Homo sapiens*. But this seems like a form of unjustified discrimination. If human welfare, say, is what matters morally, then what is so special about humans that we should only take the welfare of humans into account? Why not include animals that have the neurophysiological capacity to experience welfare?10 Considerations like this have led some to adopt *sentientism*, which claims that sentient beings capable of enjoying welfare (and the opposite) are the only subjects that have intrinsic moral worth.11 When it comes to the value of the non-sentient part of nature, sentientism coincides with anthropocentrism, as both positions imply that the non-sentient part of nature only has instrumental value.

Some objections to sentientism ask how we know that animals have welfare and, in keeping with one way of defining welfare, are able to feel pleasure and pain. But, although we cannot directly experience the pain or pleasure of others, including other animals, we can observe whether they behave in a way that is evidence of pain or pleasure. Alternatively, from our scientific knowledge of the nervous system we can infer that all mammals and birds with a nervous system like ours can experience pleasure and pain. As we have no reason to claim that plants can feel pain, humans have, according to the sentientist, no direct moral obligations toward plants.12 Others have argued that the notion of harm to an entity is not captured properly by assuming that the entity in question must have the capacity to experience pain or a reduced level of pleasure. On this view, it makes perfect sense to claim that a plant can be harmed if, say, through pollution or vandalism it is prevented from flourishing according to its telos (Greek *telos* = goal) or its potential for biological development.13

Dissatisfaction with anthropocentrism and sentientism has led to a variety of positions falling under the general heading "ecologism." Ecologists believe that, apart from humans and animals, we should also be concerned with nature for its own sake. Biocentrism (life-centred ethics) implies that only living organisms have inherent value.14 Ecocentrism (Earth-centred ethics) implies, roughly speaking, that entities such as rainforests, rivers and mountains have inherent value.15 Some ecocentrists believe that the whole biosphere has value.16

A serious challenge for ecologists is to infer, in a plausible way, from the sensiblelooking idea that trees and ecosystems can have setbacks according to their natural potential for development (thus, in one sense, being harmed) to the claim that they have intrinsic moral value. By analogy, my computer can break down, and an aeroplane can crash, and in that sense they can be said to have been harmed. But would it follow from these considerations that the computer or the aeroplane has value in itself ? Elaborating this challenge, we might add that it is not at all easy to know when a part of nature has been harmed. Is grass harmed when a lawn is mowed? If the grass is harmed, because it has value in itself, does it follow that we have a moral reason *not* to mow the lawn? And how, in any case, could it be argued that only natural entities have moral value in themselves? What about artifacts like paperclips or pools of spilt milk? Can they also be harmed? Again, if we say that they can, do we have a moral reason not to harm (bend out of shape?) paperclips?

### 3. Normative Theories and Environmental Ethics

In order to have a fully developed environmental ethics, it is necessary to combine one's preferred axiology with a normative theory that tells us how to act. For axiology

#### thomas søbirk petersen

is concerned with what kinds of thing are of value, and why, and not, at least directly, with how we ought to act. In other words, axiology points to kinds of things that we have a moral reason to be concerned about, but it has nothing to offer on the question how we ought to act all things considered. And, although it is not always obvious, people who engage in normative debate about the environment often base their reasoning on some kind of normative theory which, in more general terms, tells us how we ought to act. Normative theories are usually divided into three categories: consequentialism, deontology and virtue ethics. Consequentialism is the view that an agent is morally required to perform the act with the best consequences. Many consequentialists are utilitarians. They focus on welfare and insist that the best consequences are those containing maximum welfare. But consequentialism can be combined with any of the axiologies mentioned above.17 A biocentric consequentialist could, for example, claim that the best outcome of an action or policy is the one in which there is the most fully realized equality (of potential to flourish) between humans and other living creatures.18

Deontology, on the other hand, is the view that certain types of act (e.g. harming innocents or, perhaps, rendering a species extinct) are morally forbidden even when the performance of those acts would bring about the best consequences. In principle, deontologists can disagree over whether the deontic rules function as absolute prohibitions19 or are somewhat weaker and can be broken if enough is at stake. They can also, of course, dispute the *kinds* of action that are morally forbidden. And, like consequentialism, deontology can be combined with any of the axiologies sketched above. In the literature on environmental ethics, deontology has been combined with anthropocentrism20 and with biocentrism.21 A biocentric deontologist might claim that we are morally forbidden from killing living organisms intentionally.

In virtue theory, the focus is not so much on what kinds of act are right, but on what a virtuous person would do. In environmental ethics, the virtue ethicist might claim that the moral evaluation of something like deforestation cannot be based exclusively on consideration of what consequences that would have, or on the question whether there is a constraint on acts which lead to deforestation. Instead we must look at the *character* of the person who performs the act. If deforestation is a result of vandalism or vicious egoism, it is the kind of action a virtuous person would not engage in. Ecofeminism can be interpreted as a kind of environmental virtue ethics. One can see this when its defenders suggest that our despoliation of the environment points up problems with "male character," with its tendency to dominate, and with its limited capacity for caring and appreciation of the aesthetic beauty of nature.22

This overview of the ethical positions available in environmental ethics will, I hope, make it easier to understand why people disagree over the ethics of the environment. A major source of disagreement is, of course, *scientific* dispute over empirical facts – e.g. the causes and consequences of ozone depletion. Is depletion of the ozone layer caused by human activity, or just part of a natural process in which human emission of carbon dioxide does not matter at all? But, as philosophical discussion in environmental ethics has shown, there is plenty of room for ethical debate even if people agree on the relevant empirical data. Those engaged with environmental issues might benefit, therefore, from raised awareness of their axiological and normative commitments. These tend to be less apparent than the science, and in environmental

matters, as elsewhere, the first step toward a fruitful dialogue is usually to locate the source of disagreement.

#### Notes

- 1. The Kyoto treaty is an agreement reached under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The 164 countries (as of July 2006) which have ratified the Kyoto Protocol are, among other things, committed to reducing their emissions of carbon dioxide and five other greenhouse gases, or to engage in emission trading if they maintain or increase emissions of these gases. For details of the protocol, see: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/convkp/kpeng.html or http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Kyoto\_Protocol
- 2. Consult, e.g., the UK Labour Party official website http://www.labour.org.uk/environment04. See, e.g., www.shell.com (Shell's official website) for examples of their views on environmental issues.
- 3. e.g. *Environmental Ethics*, *Environmental Values* and *Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics*.
- 4. See, e.g., W. S. Kempton, J. M. Boster J. A. Hartley (1997) *Environmental Values in American Culture* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1997).
- 5. See, e.g., A. Light and H. Rolston (eds), *Environmental Ethics: An Anthology* (Oxford: Blackwell, 2002), or R. Elliot (ed.), *Environmental Ethics* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995).
- 6. For an excellent introduction to the debate about the scope and different varieties of environmental ethics, see A. Light, "Environmental Ethics," in R. G. Frey and C. H. Wellman (eds), *A Companion to Applied Ethics* (Oxford: Blackwell, 2003), pp. 633–49.
- 7. For a defence of the view that cities and not only the non-built part of the environment should fall under the heading of environmental ethics, see A. Light, "Urban Ecological Citizenship," *Journal of Social Philosophy*, vol. 34 (2003), no. 1, pp. 44– 63.
- 8. Anthropocentrism is a central part of western Christian thinking: see Genesis 1: 26–8. Modern adherents of anthropcentrism include L. Ferry, *The New Ecological Order* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1995), originally published as *Le nouvel order écologique: L'arbre, l'animal et l'homme* (Paris: Bernard Grasset, 1992) and R. G. Frey, *Rights, Killing and Suffering* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1983).
- 9. An important issue that divides anthropocentrists (as well as sentientists) is the moral status of future generations. Should the welfare of future generations be taken into account in environmental ethics and, if so, how? Should their welfare be subject to a kind of discount rate? For a discussion of these questions, see D. Parfit, *Reasons and Persons* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984), and J. Broome, *Counting the Cost of Global Warming* (Newbury: The White Horse Press, 1992).
- 10. For criticism of anthropocentrism, see e.g. P. Singer, "Equality for Animals?," in *Practical Ethics* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
- 11. See, e.g., P. Singer, "Environmental Ethics," in ibid.
- 12. ibid.
- 13. See, e.g., R. Attfield, "The Good of Trees," *Journal of Value Inquiry*, vol. 15 (1981), pp. 35–54 and P. Taylor, *Respect for Nature* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1986).
- 14. Influential biocentrists include Taylor, *Respect for Nature*, and A. Schweitzer, *Civilisation and Ethics*, 2nd edn (1929).
- 15. See, e.g., Elliot "Faking Nature," in *Environmental Ethics*.

#### thomas søbirk petersen

- 16. See, e.g., J. Lovelock, *Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978).
- 17. This also goes for utilitarianism! See, e.g., T. Sprigge's utilitarian defence of ecocentrism in "Are There Intrinsic Values in Nature?," *Journal for Applied Philosophy*, vol. 4 (1987), no. 1, pp. 21–8; reprinted in B. Almond D. H. Hill (eds), *Applied Philosophy: Morals and Metaphysics in Contemporary Debate* (London/New York, Routledge, 1991), pp. 37–44.
- 18. The movement known as "left biocentrism" is, as far as I can see, a consequentialist position which, unlike utilitarianism, says that we ought to be concerned about the *distribution* of what is valuable. For references to literature on left biocentrism see P. Curry (2006) *Ecological Ethics: An Introduction* (Caambridge: Polity Press, 2006).
- 19. The German philosopher Immanuel Kant is a well-known defender of this position: see his *Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten*, 1785.
- 20. See, e.g., Ferry.
- 21. See, e.g., Taylor.
- 22. For an example of ecofeminism, see V. Plumwood, "Nature, Self, and Gender: Feminism, Environmental Philosophy, and the Critique of Rationalism," in Elliot (ed.) *Enviromental Ethics*.
