---
images: []
order: 270
title: Food Processing
---

Almost everything humans eat has been processed in some way using technologies and techniques to alter raw ingredients or animals into food. Food-processing techniques include cooking, drying, fermenting, slicing, peeling and butchering. More technologically complex processing includes pasteurizing, canning, freezing, irradiating and artificially sweetening. Some processed food involves food additives, substances designed to help prevent spoilage or contamination, or to make food look and taste better. Additives are things like flavor enhancers (MSG), artificial colors and flavors, preservatives, stabilizers, sulfites and nitrates. Some processed foods include dietary supplements, additional ingredients with nutritional properties, such as vitamins, minerals, proteins, herbs, enzymes or extracts. The benefits of food-processing include improved preservation, increased distribution potential, fortification, consumer choice, and convenience. The harms and risks often associated with processed food are reduced nutritional value and adverse health effects. Heavily processed foods with (chemical) artificial ingredients and high-fructose corn syrup, like carbonated beverages and fast food, have been linked to the rise in obesity, type II diabetes, and heart disease. Ethical questions about processed food hinge on consumer sovereignty and the right to choose, government regulation and the duty to protect, and corporate responsibility and liability.

### Genetically Modified Food

Genetically modified (GM) foods are plants and animals that have been altered using recombinant DNA technology which combines DNA molecules from different sources into a single molecule. The purpose of genetic modification is to produce new and useful traits otherwise unattainable through conventional techniques. The most common (98 percent) GM foods are corn, soy, canola, and cotton seed oil. Most often foods are genetically modified to contain their own pesticides or to be herbicide-resistant. Occasionally they are engineered to be nutritionally enhanced, for example, Vitamin-A-enriched rice that reduces blindness in malnourished children, milk and peanuts that are allergen-free, tomatoes with added lycopene, carrots and potatoes with vaccines for hepatitis-B and cholera respectively. Controversy has surrounded GM foods since their introduction in the late 1990s. Critics warn of unknown health risks from allergens, and unknown environmental consequences, such as genetic transfer and new forms of pesticide- and herbicide-resistant weeds. Critics also worry about the abuse of intellectual property rights laws to privatize and patent life forms.

### Functional Food

A functional food, or "nutraceutical," is a food-based product that has added ingredients believed to provide additional health benefits. Functional foods are designed to assist in the prevention or treatment of disease, or to enhance and improve human capacities. They include products like vitamin-fortified grains, energy bars, low-fat or low-sodium foods, and sports drinks. Functional foods have existed since the early 1900s when iodine was first added to salt to prevent goiter. Vitamin D has been added to milk since the 1930s, extra vitamins and minerals to breakfast cereals since the 1940s, and water fluoridated shortly thereafter. The difference between older fortified foods and newer functional foods is that the latter are designed to replace medicine with food, or sometimes to eliminate qualities from the food to make it more nutritious. The key moral issue with functional foods is the way in which they claim to function as medicine, blurring the boundaries between food and drugs. Public health and social justice questions remain about their appropriate use, distribution and regulation. Currently, each nation may determine what kind of health claims a functional food product is allowed by law to make. Typically, food companies can produce items that make *general* health claims (to promote health) so long as they make no *specific* claims (to treat diseases). There is no legal definition for functional foods in the United States, and neither pre-market approval for safety nor proof of general health claims is required.

### Food Nanotechnology

Nanotechnology deals with objects that are measured in nanometers, or a millionth of a millimeter in size. Nanotechnology is being applied to food production and food packaging. Applications of nano-particles to food include antimicrobial filters to improve food safety; Smart (spatially directed, time-controlled release, intelligent control) delivery of nutrients, proteins and antioxidants directly to targeted body parts and cells; food products that remain fresh longer and that inhibit the absorption of harmful elements; and improved food packaging to increase shelf-life and decrease spoilage and contamination. Nanotechnology, however, might pose a potential danger when introduced into the air, water, soil and food precisely because of its minute size. Safety to persons and environments remains the most important ethical question about nanotechnology. Currently, nanotechnology in food-manufacturing is more poorly regulated in the United States, Europe and Japan than conventional food.
