---
images: []
order: 276
title: NILS HOLTUG
---

### 1. Genes, Identity and Ethics

The genetic revolution has brought us technologies such as genetic screening, genetic pre-implantation and pre-natal diagnosis, gene therapy, cloning and genetic pharmacology. Such technologies raise all sorts of ethical issues. Some of the most profound issues pertain to the impact of genetic technologies on the identity of human beings. For instance, perhaps gene therapy and genetic pharmacology may be used to treat severe diseases such as cystic fibrosis, Tay-Sachs disease and Huntington's chorea, and even to enhance human characteristics in the "normal" range, including height, memory and intelligence. Such genetic interventions will affect the identity of their recipients in that they will give them certain properties (say, better health or memory) that they would not otherwise have had. But where exactly do we draw the line for such genetic interventions?

Some uses of genetic technology will affect human identities in a deeper sense than this. If a person is successfully treated for, e.g., Huntington's chorea, this will improve his health and so give him certain new qualities, but it will still be *he* who receives these new qualities. In other words, his numerical identity is not affected. But now suppose instead that a pre-natal diagnosis reveals that a fetus carries the gene for Huntington's chorea, and his parents therefore decide to have an abortion and try to have another (healthy) child later. Here, one child is *replaced* with another that has different properties (and, in particular, is not disposed to develop Huntington's chorea), implying a change in both qualitative and numerical identities. Therefore, such a genetic intervention raises separate ethical issues.

### 2. Identity-affecting Genetic Interventions

I shall call genetic interventions that affect *who* (in the numerical sense) comes to exist *identity-affecting* and those that do not *identity-preserving* (although they will, of course, affect the recipient's qualitative identity). Both pre-implantation and pre-natal diagnosis may be identity-affecting because they may lead to selective implantation and selective abortion respectively. Likewise, perhaps certain forms of gene therapy would, if performed on a conceptus or embryo, have such massive effects on its – or the resulting child's – properties that a numerically different child would be caused to exist.

Medical interventions usually aim to benefit their recipients but, setting aside cases of "wrongful life" (see below), identity-affecting genetic interventions will often not achieve this. For instance, a fertilized egg that is not implanted because it has the gene for cystic fibrosis or a fetus that is aborted because it has the gene for Huntington's chorea will not benefit from these procedures. But things may be different if, e.g., a fertilized egg is implanted after a diagnosis reveals that it is healthy.

Some will object to certain genetic interventions because they involve the killing of a fetus (fertilized egg, embryo). Others will argue that such beings have no moral standing and that killing them can be justified on the basis of the interests of the parents (and perhaps societal interests as well).

But, even if we concede that the interests of the fetus or child should be taken into consideration, this does not automatically speak against such interventions. Thus some argue that the healthy child that the parents may have instead of the child with a serious genetic disease is likely to benefit from coming into existence, and more so than the unhealthy child would. Others deny that it can benefit a child to come into existence, but claim that the interests of the child can nevertheless be taken into account "impersonally," i.e. in terms of the welfare this child contributes to the world.

A similar question arises in relation to so-called "wrongful life" cases, where, e.g., a child sues her parents for bringing her into existence with a terrible disease rather than aborting her. Some have argued that such cases make no sense because the child cannot be harmed by being caused to exist (Heyd 1992: 29–33). However, others argue that it may in fact benefit or harm a person to come into existence (Holtug 2001), so that, in so far as a child has a life that is worse than no life at all, she is harmed by existing.

Identity-affecting interventions raise a further issue of whether some forms of "selection" amount to objectionable discrimination. It may be argued that to select against a fetus (fertilized egg, embryo) that will develop a disability is to discriminate against her and/or to express a demeaning view of the disabled. There are several issues that need to be addressed here. Do fetuses (fertilized eggs, embryos) have a moral standing that makes them capable of being discriminated against? Does selection necessarily express a demeaning view of the disabled, or might it just express that health is better than disease? Also, it has been argued that at least some of the arguments for why we discriminate if we select *against* disability implausibly imply that it should be permissible to select *for* disability (McMahan 2005).
