---
images: []
order: 280
title: Preamble
---

The technology that has exerted the greatest impact so far on the practice of law and the administration of justice is information technology (IT). It is both intuitively obvious and jurisprudentially sound to recognize that the law, with its heavy dependency on documents, information services and knowledge resources, is a fertile application area for IT. However, the full potential of IT has not yet been realized in most legal systems, partly because of underinvestment by governments and private-sector legal businesses and also because lawyers, in general, are often late adopters of new technology.

In recent years, there has been growing uptake of IT by legal practitioners, including lawyers who work in law firms, advocates who specialize in court work, and legal advisers who operate in-house within businesses and governments. In the 1970s and 1980s, the dominant uses of IT by these lawyers were in the back office – for word processing, accounting and administrative purposes. It was later recognized, in the 1980s and since, that information systems could be used to capture and share the collective know-how and experience of a legal team, so that databases of standard-form documents and legal opinions were developed and made easily accessible to lawyers from their desktops. As elsewhere, however, it was the advent of the Internet that led to IT becoming mainstream amongst practicing lawyers. Since the late 1990s, email has become the dominant way in which lawyers communicate with their clients, while hand-held machines are used extensively (some would say obsessively) to maintain contact while out of the office. The Worldwide Web and Google have transformed the information-seeking habits of lawyers, with legal resources and information about organizations and markets now being readily available. The next step in the evolution of legal technology is online systems that actually undertake legal tasks – providing legal updates, drafting documents, offering advice, and solving legal problems. The most widely used of these so far are automatic document-assembly systems.

Judges in most advanced legal systems are also using IT. Email and word processing by judges are now firmly established applications. Many judges use a wide variety of online research resources, while some are benefiting from judicial intranets as a mechanism for sharing information with one another. Where the courts are suitably equipped, judges may also have access to case-management systems, which enable them to monitor and progress the cases before them. Courtrooms are increasingly being

equipped with IT, including document- and exhibit-display systems, wall-screen and large monitors, video-linking for remote evidence, computer-assisted realtime transcription, wireless networks with Internet access, and tools (from computer graphics to virtual reality) for the presentation of evidence. More ambitious and controversial is the idea of the virtual hearing or online dispute resolution – some lawyers and legal technologists are challenging the assumption that court work requires the gathering of parties in a single, physical space and are developing systems to allow litigants to present evidence and arguments via online systems. Currently, these submissions are adjudicated upon remotely by human beings, but artificial intelligence specialists continue to speak about computers replacing judges.

Legal education and research are also being significantly affected by IT. The emergence of multimedia e-learning systems (from webcasts through to virtual legal environments) are complementing traditional teaching and sometimes replacing methods of the past. Students can attend and replay online lectures and tutorials at their convenience. And they have a wealth of primary materials (legislation and case law) and secondary materials (articles and books) at their disposal on the Worldwide Web. Legal scholarship is also undergoing substantial change. Aside from unprecedented access to legal sources, legal academics also enjoy easy access to fellow scholars around the world. While conventional conferences and symposia remain important for personal contact, ongoing dialogue by email is now pervasive.

The citizen, too, is a beneficiary of legal technology. In the past, citizens generally had to consult lawyers if they wanted advice on most legal problems. Today, these non-lawyers can obtain legal guidance on a wide range of legal issues from websites developed, amongst others, by consumer bodies, trade associations and government agencies. While the counsel provided by these sites may be less tailored and rigorous than that offered by traditional lawyers, they can provide useful briefings for people before they seek formal legal advice. And, where it is not feasible for citizens to obtain lawyers' help directly, these websites are generally far more useful than having no guidance at all.

One aspect of the legal system that has remained relatively untouched by technology is the legislative process, even though law-making could be substantially supported by IT. Various emerging technologies could be used to invite greater participation in legislating by all members of society. Historically, in representative democracies, citizens have elected politicians to represent their interests in parliaments. It was not practicable in the past for the individual views of citizens to be solicited and then reflected in policy-making and legislating. However, there are now techniques and technologies (blogs, wikis and other social software) that are designed precisely to enable and encourage Internet users to express their views, discuss their values and arguments, build communities of interest, and convey these positions to those who make new and change old law. In broad terms, this is known as e-democracy; and while there are understandable concerns about the reliability and security of related systems, especially online voting, there are strong arguments in favor of investing considerable resources in systems that enhance democratic participation. Another underexploited application of technology for use in legislating is computer-assisted drafting. There was considerable academic interest in this field in the 1980s, when various scholars pointed to the similarities between drafting legislation and writing software and suggested that

programming techniques, if applied to the law, could bring about more consistent, less ambiguous and better-structured legislation. However, this early promise has not yet been fulfilled.

As IT advances, more applications for lawyers and citizens will emerge. With sufficient investment and careful planning, IT could greatly enhance the efficiency of lawyers and substantially increase access to justice.
