---
images: []
order: 296
title: Preamble
---

The relation between religion and science has been the subject of extended philosophical discussions, that between religion and technology much less so. When religious belief (in one European version) is bound up with an Earth-centered cosmology or theology of creation and opposed by heliocentric astronomy or evolutionary biology respectively, problems readily arise. Either the belief needs purification or the science is mistaken; boundaries must be adjudicated and interactions analyzed. Yet, in so far as technology is simply an instrumental means, any opposition would seem to be downgraded from the level of analysis to one of temptation to misuse – with temptations being adequately addressed simply with more resolute faith. Existentially, however, technologies can be designed to appeal to lower or higher human inclinations in ways that enhance one over the other, so that in practice, if not in theory, there can exist problematic relations between religion and technology. In addition, there is the problematic claim that one particular religion (namely Christianity) contributed uniquely to the rise of technology in its modern form.

To restate, from the perspective of ethics alone: Both historically and culturally, moral practice is closely associated with religion. This is true in two senses: Many people find it difficult to imagine a morality that is not religiously based. Virtually no one can imagine religions that do not include substantive components of morality, even if their adherents may fail to live out the moral ideals to which they are committed. Indeed, virtually all religions seem to pose some degree of tension or conflict between alternative ways of life and to argue for one of these ways as higher or superior. In so far as technology itself can constitute a way of life, it is thus subject to religious or spiritual assessment. To some extent, then, the question of the relation between religion and technology can be considered as a special version of the relation between moral theory or ethics and technology.

Religion and technology, like ethics and technology, can be analyzed in terms of historical traditions, basic features, or particular issues. In terms of historical traditions, it would be necessary to consider what different religions, from Hinduism to Islam, might have to say about technology. In terms of basic features, religion and technology are, in different senses, fundamentally related and opposed, so that the key philosophical challenge is to identify and assess these different relations. With regard to particular issues, from industrialization to nuclear weapons, environmental pollution, artificial

contraception, medicalized abortion and euthanasia, computerized communication, and space travel the discussion could easily expand beyond the confines of an introductory overview.
