---
images: []
order: 297
title: Historico-theological Debates
---

One prominent instance of analyzing what historical traditions have to say about technology centers around the question of whether Christianity made a distinctive contribution to the rise of modern technology. The relation between Christianity and technology was initially broached in scholarly form by the social scientist Max Weber (1864–1920), who focused on the contribution of Protestant Christianity to the development of capitalist industrialization. By attributing to Christianity some responsibility for the rise of techno-capitalist civilization, Weber popularized a criticism previously advanced by philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900), that bourgeois culture was simply Christian morality write large.

Prior to the initial stirrings of distinctly modern attitudes, most religious philosophies were at least minimally wary of what is now called technology. The argument was fundamentally quite simple: that the pursuit and practice of technics distracts from higher things. This idea can be found in the Jewish–Christian scriptures as well as in Daoist and Buddhist teachings. In the first case, one may cite the stories of a conflict between the shepherd, Abel, and the builder of cities, Cain (Genesis 4), and of the attempt by humans to aggrandize themselves through the technical construction of a tower that would undermine dependence on the divine (Genesis 11: 4–9). In the second, a story from China relates that the sage Chuang Tzu (fourth century bce) once saw a peasant irrigating his garden with a bucket and explained how irrigation could be done more easily with a machine called a shadoof. The old peasant declined the advice, contending that "where there are ingenious machines, there are sure to be crafty actions [and] a scheming mind [that undermines] simplicity. . . . The unsettled spirit is not the proper residence of the Dao" (see Muller 1891: bk 12, sect. 11).

With conscious opposition to such traditions, modernity arose during the long sixteenth century in association with arguments for the priority of technology in human affairs. These arguments at once tended to criticize traditional religious beliefs and reinterpret them in radical ways. For instance, Francis Bacon (1561–1626) argued that the practice of Christian charity required pursuit of the control of nature for relief of the human estate. Weber's *The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism* (1904–5) found in Calvinist theology another source of commitment to this-worldly transformation.

According to Weber, cultures are characterized by the presence of numerous techniques. "There are," Weber observed, "techniques of every conceivable type of action, techniques of prayer, of asceticism, of thought and research, of memorizing, of education, of exercising political or hierarchic domination, of administration, of making love, of making war, of musical performance, of sculpture and painting, of arriving at legal decisions" (*Economy and Society*, Vol. 1, p. 65). In premodern cultures these techniques are never evaluated solely in their own terms, that is, in terms of effectiveness or their "rational" relation to some well-defined material product. The technique of butchering, for instance, was customarily oriented not solely toward the preparation of meat, but also involved placating the gods or acting in harmony with various ritual prescriptions. Only with the rise of Protestantism did religion, economics, politics, the arts, and other dimensions of culture get spun off into semi-autonomous spheres, thus making possible an assessment of their techniques in strictly rational terms – and thereby giving birth to what we now appropriately call "technology."

The Weber thesis has been criticized by those suspicious of mono-causal explanations and uneasy with giving such strong weight to "ideal types" and personal agency. While Robert Merton (1938) offered complementary confirmation to Weber, others have challenged Weber's understanding of Protestantism, which privileged interpretations on the basis of their influence not their orthodoxy. In reality, according to the Christian sociologist Jacques Ellul, "The technical movement of the West developed in a world which had already withdrawn from the dominant influence of Christianity" (1954: 35).

Just as the Weber debate seemed to have exhausted itself, the historian of technology Lynn White, Jr (1907–87) expanded analysis of the Christianity–technology relationship by pushing the argument for a positive relationship between certain kinds of religious asceticism and the pursuit of technical prowess back into medieval Latin Catholicism and criticizing not its promotion of bourgeois values but as a cause of the environmental crisis. White excluded only Eastern Orthodox Christianity because of its interpretation of Christian teaching as more a *gnosis*, or spiritual enlightenment, than a disciplining of the will, and its resistance to the contamination of sacred space with mechanical devices such as the organ and the clock. His essay on "The Historical Roots of Our Ecologic Crisis" (1967) credited Western Christianity with a large measure of responsibility for environmental pollution because of its emphasis on active conformity to God's will and a sympathy for power technologies.

The impact of White's criticism, especially in so far as it was used to develop a pro-pagan environmentalism critical of Christianity (contrary to White himself, who argued for a reform Christianity with appeal to Franciscan respect for nature), was the stimulation of a double defense. One defense challenged White's characterization of Christian theology, the other his assumptions about the environmental crisis. Against White's claim that Christianity promoted technological exploitation of nature and was thus to blame for the environmental crisis, a spectrum of theologians from Catholic to evangelical replied, in arguments reminiscent of earlier responses to Weber, that White had failed to distinguish true Christianity from its cultural perversions. The authentic Christian teaching, such apologists maintained, was environmental stewardship. A second defense argued against White that technology was not properly characterized as causing an environmental crisis, but instead had done more to benefit humanity in ways consonant with the requirements of Christian charity than all environmentalists together – and was actually overcoming the alleged environmental problems attributed to it. No book has better documented the pro-technology response than David Noble's *The Religion of Technology* (1997).
