---
images: []
order: 300
title: JESPER RYBERG
---

The development of new technology gives rise to several ethical questions concerning the moral responsibility of those who carry out the development, i.e. the scientists (obviously, such work may involve traditional scientists, engineers and several other groups; however, for reasons of ease in exposition I shall here use "the scientists"). One type of question concerns the moral legitimacy of the scientific work itself. For instance, to what extent is it acceptable to perform experiments on animals or humans? What is the proper behavior when scientists are competing with other scientists? How and to what extent ought new results to be presented? Such questions have over the last decades been treated within different fields of ethics such as the ethics of animals, medical ethics and, more recently, what has become known as research ethics (see Erwin, Gendin and Kleiman 1994). Another type of question, however, concerns not the scientific process itself, but the application of the results of the scientific research. The fact that the scientific work, especially the work that leads to new technology, may end up having a severe impact on many people's lives raises the question concerning the extent to which scientists should be regarded as personally responsible for the consequences of their work. This is the question to be dealt with here.

Shortly after the end of the Second World War a correspondence took place between Albert Einstein and the American Quaker A. J. Muste (see Chalk 1989). The background for this correspondence was an appeal in which Einstein urged the public for donations to support scientists in their attempts to develop controls limiting the use of nuclear weapons. The point made by Muste was that if the appeal were to be taken seriously, then what Einstein and other scientists should do would be to renounce any involvement in constructing such weapons in the first place. He concluded by asking: "As for the masses, how can they be expected to believe that atomic weapons are as worthless and horrible as the scientists say they are, when the scientists continue to make the things . . . ," and, furthermore, he declared that this "cannot make sense to ordinary human beings" (Chalk 1989: 61).

The question that constitutes the core of this correspondence, and one which has often later been posed, is: Do scientists have a moral responsibility for the consequences of their work – for instance, the death of people that might follow from the construction of certain types of weapons? Naturally the question can be posed positively, such as whether there is an obligation for the scientist to take part in research that will be to the benefit of many people. However, since scientists usually have various incentives – for instance, what J. R. Oppenheimer once referred to as the "sweetness" of scientific problems or simply their salary – to engage in scientific work, the question has typically been phrased negatively, such as whether there exists a moral obligation to abstain from carrying out or participating in certain kinds of research.

According to one stand, this question should be answered in the negative. In academic discussions, as well as in broader public discussions, several arguments have been presented to this effect. Following one such argument, the idea of the moral responsibility of scientists rests on misrepresentation of the nature of scientific work. Correctly perceived, scientific inquiry is an activity that seeks to eliminate an undesirable characteristic of a situation. However, since the scientist cannot foresee the specific truth his work will yield – otherwise why should he have engaged in inquiry in the first place? – it makes no sense to hold him/her responsible for results that follow from the research (see Hoffman 1975). To this argument it might be objected that, even though some scientific research is pure or fundamental, in the sense that from the outset it is not clear what the precise purpose of the inquiry consists in, there is also scientific work that is "mission-oriented," in the sense that the scientist has a very good idea of what he/she is looking for. This is especially the case when it comes to the development of new technology: one often knows what one is aiming at, but not how to reach or construct it (Belsey 1978). Moreover, even though scientific work sometimes produces totally unexpected results, this does not indicate whether or not the scientist ought to communicate his/her results (Ryberg 2003).

Another argument to the effect that the scientist should not be held morally responsible proclaims that questions of right and wrong are state matters, not matters that lie in the hands of individual scientists. This argument was presented by several scientists in their objection to Muste's appeal. For instance, W. Higginbotham contended: "We believe in government of the people . . . if scientists were to walk out on all military projects they would be taking the law into their own hands just as surely as the Ku Klux Klan" (Chalk 1989: 69). More generally, the view is that morality should be handled by the state. This argument raises several questions. For instance, is it not the fact that there are many cases where we have a personal moral responsibility independently of what a state decides? And does the argument presuppose that state decisions are always right? If so, are there not many examples in our history that bring this assumption into question?

Perhaps the argument which most naturally comes to mind is the one that claims that scientists should not be held responsible, for the simple reason that they do not decide how the results of their work should be applied (Hoffman 1975). Responsibility for use is rightly ascribed to whoever formulates a policy and whoever makes the decisions, and this group almost never includes scientists but rather politicians. This argument leads one to wonder whether the fact that one could have prevented a certain undesirable outcome from happening is not sufficient for the ascription of responsibility, no matter whether other people's decisions intervene in the series of events leading to this outcome (Ryberg 2003).

A further argument worth mentioning has been referred to as the "replaceability argument" (see Lackey 1994). In short, the argument says that "If I did not do it, someone else would" and, therefore, "I did not really do anything wrong." If an undesirable

outcome follows from a scientist's work, but this work would have been carried out by another scientist had the first rejected it, then, the argument goes, the first scientist had not made things worse than they would have been, and he/she should therefore not be held responsible. One way of challenging this argument would be to hold that there are certain acts that are wrong to perform independently of the consequences they produce.

As well as the above-mentioned arguments, other arguments have been presented in defence of the view that scientists do not have moral responsibility (Lackey 1994, Ryberg 2003). If one instead leaves aside the negative answers in favor of the outlook that the initially mentioned question should be answered in the affirmative, the number of arguments is much more limited. The main argument, of course, is that in so far as scientists engage in work that may have important consequences for other people's lives they do carry a moral responsibility. One of the practical challenges that follows from this point of view is that it may be very difficult for the individual scientist to foresee the consequences of his/her work. To stick to general rules such as that it is wrong to contribute to the development of military technology is probably much too simplistic. Weapons and other military technologies may be used to protect people and to prevent undesirable consequences. Moreover, technologies may turn out to have consequences that reach far beyond the more narrow purpose for which they were initially constructed. For instance, it is well known that, while nuclear power, and also drugs, pesticides, aircraft, radar, processed food, satellites, computers, transistors, lasers and many other technologies have been developed for military purposes, they have had obvious beneficial civilian applications as well. Thus transforming more general considerations on responsibility into something that can guide the individual scientist in his/her daily work may well be a complicated challenge.

#### References and Further Reading

Belsey, A. (1978). "The Moral Responsibility of the Scientist," *Philosophy,* vol. 53.

Chalk, R. (1989). "Drawing the Line: An Examination of Conscientious Objection in Science," in Mircham, C. and Siekevitz, P. (eds) (1989).

Erwin, E., Gendin, S. and Kleiman, L. (eds) (1994). *Ethical Issues in Scientific Research* (New York/ London: Garland).

Hoffman, R. (1975). "Scientific Research and Moral Rectitude," *Philosophy*, vol. 50.

Lackey, D. P. (1994). "Military Funds, Moral Demands: Personal Responsibility of the Individual Scientist," in Erwin, E., Gendin, S. and Kleiman, L. (eds) (1994).

Mitcham, C. and Siekevitz, P. (eds) (1994). "Ethical Issues Associated with Scientific and Technological Research for the Military," *Annals of the New York Academy of Science*, vol. 577.

Ryberg, J. (2003). "Ethics and Military Research: On the Moral Responsibility of Scientists," in B. Booss-Bavnbek and J. Højrup (eds), *Mathematics and War* (Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag).
