---
images: []
order: 303
title: JEROEN VAN DER HOVEN AND NOEMI MANDERS-HUITS
---

Value-sensitive design (VSD) is an approach to systems development and software engineering which was first introduced in the last decade of the twentieth century as an approach for incorporating human values into the design of (information) technology. VSD was developed by Batya Friedman and others, building on insights of the human– computer interaction community (HCI) to draw attention to the social and moral dimensions of design. Other initiatives had also been studying the social implications of computer technology, such as computer ethics, computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) and participatory design (PD). Some of these research communities, like value-sensitive design, have also tried to incorporate values into the design of technological systems at an early stage; however, whereas these approaches tend to focus on functional and instrumental values (e.g. user-friendliness), value-sensitive design focuses *primarily* on addressing values of *moral* import, such as privacy, trust and autonomy. Although building a user-friendly technology might also increase a user's sense of autonomy or trust, in value-sensitive design the attention for moral values is the primary goal. According to Friedman:

Value-Sensitive Design is primarily concerned with values that center on human wellbeing, human dignity, justice, welfare, and human rights. Value-Sensitive Design connects the people who design systems with the people who think about and understand the values of the stakeholders who are affected by the systems. Ultimately, Value-Sensitive Design requires that we broaden the goals and criteria for judging the quality of technological systems to include those that advance human values.

(Friedman and Kahn 2000)

Several authors in the field of value-sensitive design drew attention to human and moral values as an integral part of the conception, design and development of technological artifacts and systems. These include design for values (Camp 2007), values at play (Flanagan, Howe and Nissenbaum 2005; Flanagan, Howe and Nissenbaum, in press), value-sensitive design (Friedman 1999; Friedman, Kahn and Borning 2002) and disclosive computer ethics developed by Philip Brey (2000). Each of these frameworks seeks (1) to broaden the criteria for judging the quality of technological systems to include the advancement of moral values, and (2) to promulgate the proactive influencing of the design of technologies to account for such values during the early phase of the design process.

System developers, information architects and designers in other disciplines are traditionally primarily interested in functional requirements (e.g. speed, capacity, cost, durability, robustness) and related values such as usability, efficiency, reliability and affordability. Value-sensitive design draws attention to the impact technologies have on human well-being and the quality of human lives. The underlying idea of valuesensitive design is that technology is not value-neutral. Technology is bound to have moral and political implications for those affected by it. Furthermore, much of our technology is not merely enabling but constitutive. It shapes our practices and institutions in important ways. It changes our way of life and the way we think, in education, business, healthcare and science, van den Hoven argues (2005). Decisions made in design determine future opportunities and possibilities of those who work with it. As Friedman points out, however (Friedman and Kahn 2003), values are neither solely designed into technology, nor solely conveyed by social drivers and forces. Influence is exerted bi-directionally. New technologies may be applied and used for purposes other than those intended in design, and technologies are adjusted and changed in a dynamical development process. This is what is called an interactional position. An adequate account of technology needs to accommodate both design and social context and the interaction between them (Friedman and Kahn 2003).

Many social and philosophical scholars of technology have attempted to expose the social and political biases embedded in technical systems and artifacts (see, for example, Berg 1998; Latour 1992, 1985; Mumford 1964; Winner 1980). They argue that technologies tend to promote certain ideologies, while obscuring others. Scholars in ethics of information technology have extended this research into questions of how information technologies specifically exemplify *ethical* and *value* biases (see, for example, Friedman 1997, 2005; Moor 1985; Nissenbaum 2001; Tavani 2004). Value-sensitive design recognizes that the design of technologies bears "directly and systematically on the realization, or suppression, of particular configurations of social, ethical, and political values" (Flanagan, Howe and Nissenbaum 2005).

In order to do justice to these moral and political implications, value-sensitive design is employed as a methodology of systems design that "seeks to design technology that accounts for human values in a principled and comprehensive manner throughout the design process" (Friedman and Kahn 2000). It is at the same time, as pointed to by van den Hoven (2005), "a way of doing ethics that aims at making moral values part of technological design, research and development." Several value-sensitive design initiatives share a similar methodological structure, an integrative and iterative tripartite methodology consisting of conceptual, empirical and technical investigations (see Friedman, Kahn and Borning 2002, 2006; or Flanagan, Howe and Nissenbaum 2005). Each of the conceptual, empirical and technical investigations and analyses are carried out iteratively, mutually informing and being informed by the other investigation. These interdependencies are metaphorically described by Nissenbaum as "balls in play" (Flanagan, Howe and Nissenbaum 2005), where attention to three different modes (balls) of investigation must be maintained and balanced for successful implementation. "Conscientious designers must juggle and keep in the play the results

of at least three modes," i.e. the results of empirical, conceptual and technical research (Flanagan, Howe and Nissenbaum 2005).

The first "ball," the conceptual analysis, is informed by ethics and moral philosophy regarding particular value constructs relevant to the design in question. This connects to the development in ethics termed "The Design Turn in Applied Ethics" by van den Hoven (2007). This refers to the way in which moral philosophers are starting to think about the way in which their analyses can be successfully implemented and expressed in institutional arrangements, infrastructure, artifacts and systems, and can thereby contribute to desirable moral changes in the real world. "Value-Sensitive Design provides us with the opportunity to deal with these ethical issues in a new and fresh way: by 'frontloading ethics' by means of proactive integration of ethical reflection in the early stages of design" (van den Hoven 2005).

The second ball in play is the empirical mode of investigation, providing empirical data in support of the values investigated in the conceptual mode, as well as empirical data providing feedback in support of the technical investigation of a particular design. Finally, the third ball, the technical analysis, investigates particular technical design specifications and variables that might promote or obscure given values within the context of the technology being designed. Decisions during the design process knowingly or unknowingly determine to a large extent the moral and political implications a technology may have in practice. Any particular design enables features, opportunities and possibilities, while playing off others. In the technical analysis the focus is primarily on how technologies can support or compromise human values. Subsequently, it tries to incorporate the results of the conceptual and empirical phases into designing in a proactive manner (Friedman 2004).

The values at play (VAP) approach offers a similar tripartite methodological framework consisting of discovery, translation and verification phases (Flanagan, Howe and Nissenbaum 2005). The goal of the discovery phase is to identify the values that might be relevant to the design of a particular technology, including those explicit in the aspirations of the technology's designers, as well as those that only emerge when the technological design process is underway. The translation phase of VAP is the activity in which designers translate the value considerations identified in the discovery phase into the architecture and features of the technology. The final phase is verification, ensuring that the designers have successfully implemented the values identified throughout the discovery process. In both the VSD and VAP versions, these three modes of investigation are intended to form an integrative and iterative methodological framework for embodying human and moral values into the design of technology.

#### References and Further Reading

Berg, M. (1998). "The politics of technology: On bringing social theory into technological design," in *Science, Technology, and Human Values*, 23(4): 456–490.

Brey, P. (2000). "Method in Computer Ethics: Towards a Multi-level Interdisciplinary Approach," in *Ethics and Information Technology*, 2 (2): 125–9.

- Brey, P. (2001). "Disclosive Computer Ethics," in R. A. Spinello and H. T. Tavani (eds), *Readings in Cyberethics* (Boston, Mass.: Jones & Bartlett), pp. 51–62.
- Camp, L. J. (2007). *Design for Values, Design for Trust*. Retrieved 18 September 2007, from http://www.ljean.com/design.html
- Cummings, M. L. (2006). "Integrating Ethics in Design through the Value-Sensitive Design Approach," *Science and Engineering Ethics*, 12: 701–15.
- Flanagan, M., Howe, D. and Nissenbaum, H. (2005). *Values at Play: Design Tradeoffs in Sociallyoriented Game Design*. Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 751–60.
- Flanagan, M., Howe, D. and Nissenbaum, H. (in press). "Values in Design: Theory and Practice," in J. van den Hoven and J. Weckert (eds), *Information Technology and Moral Philosophy* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
- Friedman, B. (1997). *Human Values and the Design of Computer Technology* (CSLI lecture notes; no. 72) (New York: Cambridge University Press).
- Friedman, B. (1999). *Value-Sensitive Design: A Research Agenda for Information Technology*. National Science Foundation, Contract No: SBR-9729633.
- Friedman, B. (2004). "Value Sensitive Design," in W. S. Bainbridge (ed.), *Berkshire Encyclopedia of Human–Computer Interaction* (Berkshire Publishing Group).
- Friedman, B. and Kahn, P. (2000). *New Directions: A Value-Sensitive Design Approach to Augmented Reality*. Proceedings of DARE 2000 on Designing augmented reality environments, pp. 163–4.
- Friedman, B. and Kahn, Jr, P. H. (2003). "Human Values, Ethics, and Design," in J. A. Jacko and A. Sears (eds), *The Human–Computer Interaction Handbook* (Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum), pp. 1177–1201.
- Friedman, B. and Kahn, Jr, P. H. (in press). "A Value-Sensitive Design Approach to Augmented Reality," in W. E. Mackay (ed.), *Design of Augmented Reality Environments* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
- Friedman, B., Kahn, P. and Borning, A. (2002). *Value Sensitive Design: Theory and Methods* (Technical Report 02-12-01).
- Friedman, B., Kahn, Jr, P. H. and Borning, A. (2006). "Human–Computer Interaction and Management Information Systems – Foundations," in P. Zhang and D. Galetta (eds), *Advances in Management Information Systems*, Vol. 4 (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe).
- Johnson, D. and Nissenbaum, H. (eds) (1995). *Computers, Ethics and Social Values* (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall).
- Latour, B. (1992). "Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mundane artifacts," in W. Bijker, and J. Law (eds), *Shaping technology/building society: Studies in sociotechnical change* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), pp. 225–258.
- Moor, J. (1985). "What Is Computer Ethics?," *Metaphilosophy*, 16: 266–75.
- Mumford, L. (1964). "Authoritarian and Democratic Technics," *Technology and Culture*, 5 (1): 1–8. Nielsen, J. (1993). *Usability Engineering* (Boston, Mass.: Academic Press).
- Nissenbaum, H. (2001). "How Computer Systems Embody Values," *IEEE Computer*, 34 (3): 118–20. Tavani, H. T. (2004). *Ethics and Technology: Ethical Issues in an Age of Information and Communication Technology* (Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley).
- van den Hoven, M. J. (2005). "Design for Values and Values for Design," *Information Age*, August–September, pp. 4–7.
- van den Hoven, M. J. (2007). "Moral Methodology and Information Technology," in H. Tavani and K. Himma (eds), *Handbook of Computer Ethics* (Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley).
- Winner, L. (1980). "Do Artifacts Have Politics?," *Daedalus*, 109 (1): 121–36.
