---
images: []
order: 308
title: 4. Dealing with Technological Uncertainty
---

We have seen that the two traditional methods for dealing with technological uncertainties both have severe limitations. Risk analysis, in its traditional form, is based on quantitative measures of risk in the form of expectation values. In order to obtain these measures, probability values that are required are often unavailable even for technologies in use, and always unavailable for future technologies that differ in their basic structures from the technologies already in place. Technology assessment, as originally conceived, should foresee the development of new technologies and their social consequences. It has not delivered such predictions, although it has contributed to public discourse on technology in many other useful ways.

We therefore need to develop new frameworks that can provide policy guidance in the difficult issues that technological development gives rise to. In what follows, three possible beginnings for such developments will be mentioned. The first of them may be a surprise since it is much older than technology assessment or risk analysis. It may nevertheless have some of the answers for which we are searching.

#### *4.1 Safety engineering*

Since the nineteenth century, engineers have specialized in workers' safety and other safety-related tasks. But, although safety engineering is taught at technological colleges and universities, it has a much lower profile than risk analysis. One of the reasons may be that whereas risk analysis is programmatically unified, covering all sorts of risk with the same methodology, safety engineering is fragmented between different areas of technology. But a closer study will reveal that the various forms of safety engineering exhibit similar ways of thinking about risk and safety. Here, we shall show this by presenting three (of the many) principles that are applied by safety engineers.

*Inherent safety*, also called primary prevention, consists in the elimination of a hazard. It is contrasted with secondary prevention that consists in retaining the hazard but reducing the risk associated with it. For a simple example, consider a process in which inflammable materials are used. Inherent safety would consist in replacing them by non-inflammable materials. Secondary prevention would consist in removing or isolating sources of ignition and/or installing fire-extinguishing equipment. As this example shows, secondary prevention usually employs add-on safety equipment. Safety engineers, in particular in the chemical industry, have developed methods to achieve as much inherent safety as possible in an industrial plant. Proponents of inherent safety maintain that, other things being equal, if we have a choice between eliminating and managing a hazard, then elimination is the better option. The major reason for this is that, as long as the hazard still exists, it can be realized by some unanticipated triggering event. Even with the best of control measures, some unforeseen chain of events can give rise, for instance, to a fire. Even the best add-on safety technology can fail, or be destroyed in the course of an accident. Even if the calculated risk is very low, this calculation may be uncertain, and this uncertainty can be sufficient reason to eliminate the hazard.

*Multiple safety barriers* are based on principles that are at least as old as the fortresses of antiquity. If the enemy manages to pass the first wall, there are additional layers that protect the defending forces. Some engineering safety barriers follow the same principle of concentric physical barriers. As one example of this, modern nuclear reactors have a series of physical barriers against radioactive leakage. In other cases, the safety barriers are consecutive in a temporal rather than a spatial sense. Consider, for instance, the protection of workers against a dangerous gas, such as hydrogen sulfide, that can leak from a chemical process. The first barrier consists in constructing the whole plant in a way that excludes uncontrolled leakage as far as possible. The second barrier is careful maintenance, including regular checking of vulnerable details such as valves. The third barrier is a warning system combined with routines for evacuation of the premises in the case of a leakage. The fourth barrier is efficient and well-trained rescue services. The basic idea behind multiple barriers is that, even if a barrier is well constructed, it may fail, perhaps for some unforeseen reason, and that the next barrier should then provide protection.

*Safety factors*, finally, are numerical factors that are used to dimension a safety reserve. The use of safety factors originates in the latter half of the nineteenth century. Safety factors now have a central role in structural mechanics and in its many applications in different engineering disciplines. Elaborate systems of safety factors have been developed, and specified in norms and standards. Most commonly, a safety factor is expressed as the ratio between a measure of the maximal load not leading to the specified type of failure and a corresponding measure of the applied load. Hence, we may choose to build a bridge so that it resists twice the highest load that we predict that it will be subjected to. We have then used a safety factor of 2. According to standard accounts of structural mechanics, safety factors are intended to compensate for five major categories of sources of failure: higher loads than those foreseen, worse properties of the material than foreseen, imperfect theory of the failure mechanism in question, possibly unknown failure mechanisms, and human error (e.g. in design) (Knoll 1976, Moses 1997). The last three of these failure types are errors in our theory and in our application of it. Thus, safety factors aim not only at calculable risk but also at non-numerical uncertainties. (It is not in practice feasible to adjust a calculation to compensate self-referentially for an estimated probability that the calculation itself may be wrong.)

As we saw in section 2.2, in the assessment of new and emerging technologies, uncertainty is often more important than calculable risks. Therefore, it speaks much in favour of safety engineering that its major guiding principles are aimed at coping not only with risks but also with uncertainties. For a further example, suppose that a ship-builder comes up with a convincing plan for an unsinkable ship (much better than *Titanic*). A probabilistic risk analysis shows that the probability of the ship sinking is incredibly low. Based on the PRA, a risk–benefit analysis is performed. It shows that the cost of lifeboats would be economically indefensible. The risk–benefit analysis therefore clearly shows us that the ship should not have any lifeboats. Would a safety engineer accept the probabilistic analysis and exclude lifeboats from the design? The answer is no, if she follows the traditions of her profession, and this for a very simple reason: the calculations may possibly be wrong, and if they are, then the outcome can be disastrous. The additional safety barrier in the form of lifeboats (and evacuation routines and all the rest) should not be excluded, in spite of the probability estimates showing them to be uncalled for.

### *4.2 Scenarios and contingency planning*

In military planning, there is a long tradition of testing alternative scenarios, based on possible strategy choices by the enemy. In the 1950s, the use of alternative scenarios in order to prepare for different possible futures was developed in American think-tanks such as the RAND corporation. In the 1970s the Royal Dutch/Shell company took up this methodology and started to use scenarios in the strategic planning of the company. Brainstorm seminars, with participants from different management levels, were used to develop the scenarios. This participation was considered important to ensure that the scenarios will be considered relevant by those supposed to use them in planning activities.

In addition to brainstorming, several more methods have been developed for the construction of plausible scenarios. One such method is to develop, separately for

recombination, (1) internal elements, consisting in developments that the planning entity (the company) has in its own control, (2) transactional elements, consisting in developments that the planning entity has influence but not full control over, and (3) contextual elements such as the development of the global economy that the planning entity has at most marginal influence over. Other methodologies have been developed for the combinatorial combination of such elements into full scenarios (Dreborg 2004: 24–8).

It has been reported that Shell, using scenario methodology, was able to foresee the oil crisis in 1973 and therefore made adjustments that put them at advantage in relation to competitors during this crisis. Other companies, and some public agencies, have taken up the same methodology and developed it for their own purposes. Although it has on occasions been applied to issues of technological risk, this is yet largely an unexplored application area for scenario-based planning.

#### *4.3 New deliberative processes*

In the 1980s, *participatory Technology Assessment (pTA)* came up as an alternative to traditional TA, foremost in Denmark and the Netherlands. This was a response to demands for a more socially oriented approach to technology and for increased public influence and participation in decision-making. Typically, pTA involves a broader spectrum of actors than traditional TA, such as politicians, NGOs, trade unions, journalists, scientists, technology developers, and lay people. At the same time, risk communication developed into a major branch of risk analysis. Risk communicators have developed procedures for dialogue that aim at decreasing the distance between decision-makers and the public.

What has usually been missing in these discussions is a systematic approach to planning for the future. Procedures need to be developed that facilitate deliberation on risk and uncertainty. A recent proposal is to base such discussions on hypothetical retrospection, i.e. on procedures in which we place ourselves hypothetically in the future in order to find out how we might in the future come to evaluate what we do now (Hansson 2007b).

One way to organize hypothetical retrospection is through convergence seminars. This is a procedure containing two phases of discussions based on future scenarios. In the first phase, the participants are divided into scenario groups. Each such group is assigned the task of discussion of one particular scenario. The different scenarios coincide up to a point in time at which a risk-related decision is made, but they differ in what decision is made and in what happens after the decision. Hence, in a discussion on medical enhancement, one group may discuss a scenario in which a decision is made to allow new enhancement methods such as drugs that improve mental faculties, and as a result of this decision new social patterns develop that give rise to severe tensions between social groups. Another group discusses a scenario in which the same decision is made, and some of the enhancement methods turn out to have severe side-effects, but large segments of the population still feel a pressure to use them. A third group can discuss a scenario in which the new enhancement methods are instead forbidden, but an uncontrolled black market results in much more dangerous practices than would otherwise have been the case. The discussions in these groups are based on questions structured to clarify standpoints about the decision in question.

In the second phase, the participants are regrouped into convergence groups, each of which contains participants from the different scenario groups. In these groups, each participant reports the discussion in the scenario group of which she was a member. After that the group discusses the issue at hand, again with the help of questions structured to clarify standpoints about the decision. To finish off, a joint session is held with all the participants from different groups, and here each convergence group reports its conclusions.

This methodology can be seen as a further development of the scenario methodology described in section 4.2, adjusting it specifically to deal with the subject matter of technological risks. Convergence seminars have been tried out with good results in discussions on the possible risks and benefits of future nanotechnology (Godman and Hansson, in preparation). It should be observed that this method goes in the opposite direction to that taken in commonly used decision tools such as risk analysis. Risk analysis abstracts from individuals and their relationships and counts statistical lives of non-identified persons. In contrast, hypothetical retrospection adds concreteness so that our deliberations will be based on "the full story" rather than on curtailed versions of it. More specifically, this procedure brings to our attention interpersonal relations that should be essential in a moral appraisal of risk and uncertainty, such as who exposes whom to a risk, who receives the benefits from whose exposure to risk, etc. It is only by staying off such concreteness that standard risk analysis can remain on the detached and depersonalized level of statistical lives and free-floating risks and benefits.
