---
images: []
order: 311
title: Preamble
---

Modern society has become a risk society in the sense that it is increasingly occupied with debating, preventing and managing risks that it itself has produced. That may well be, many will object, but it is indicative rather of a hysteria and politics of fear instigated and aggravated by the mass media. On the contrary, would not someone, looking at European societies from outside, have to acknowledge that the risks which get us worked up are luxury risks more than anything else? After all, our world appears a lot safer than that, say, of the war-torn regions of Africa, Afghanistan or the Middle East. Are modern societies not distinguished precisely by the fact that, to a large extent, they have succeeded in bringing under control contingencies and uncertainties, for example with respect to accidents, violence and sickness? Recent events have once again reminded us, with the Tsunami catastrophe, the destruction of New Orleans by Hurricane Katrina, the devastation of large regions in South America and Pakistan, how limited the claim to control of modern societies in the face of natural forces remains. But even natural hazards appear less random than they used to. Although human intervention may not stop earthquakes or volcanic eruptions, they can be predicted with reasonable accuracy. We anticipate them in terms both of structural arrangements as well as of emergency planning.

As true as all such observations may be, they miss the most obvious point about risk: that is, the key distinction between risk and catastrophe. Risk does *not* mean catastrophe. Risk means the *anticipation* of catastrophe. Risks exist in a permanent state of virtuality, and only become "topical" to the extent that they are anticipated. Risks are not "real"; they are "*becoming real*" ( Joost van Loon). At the moment at which risks become real – for example, in the shape of a terrorist attack – they cease to be risks and become catastrophes. Risks have already moved elsewhere: to the anticipation of further attacks, inflation, new markets, wars or the reduction of civil liberties. Risks are always events that are threatening. Without techniques of visualization, without symbolic forms, without mass media, etc., risks are nothing at all. In other words, it is irrelevant whether we live in a world which is in fact or in some sense "objectively" safer than all other worlds; if destruction and disasters are anticipated, then that produces a compulsion to act.

This in turn conceals an irony – the irony of the promise of security made by scientists, companies and governments, which in wondrous fashion contributes to an

increase in risks. Finding themselves accused in public of countenancing risk, ministers jump into rivers or get their children to eat hamburgers, in order to "prove" that everything is "absolutely" safe and under control – from which follows, as surely as night follows day, that every doubt cast, every accident violates the basis of the unshakeable right to security that appears to be promised.

In my first publication, in 1986, I described *Risk Society* as "an inescapable *structural* condition of advanced industrialization" – and criticized the "mathematicized morality" of expert thinking and public discourse on "risk profiling." While policyoriented risk assessment posited the manageability of risks, I pointed out that "even the most restrained and moderate-objectivist account of risk implications involves a hidden politics, ethics and morality." Risk "is not reducible to the product of probability of occurrence multiplied with the intensity and scope of potential harm." Rather, it is a socially constructed phenomenon, in which some people have a greater capacity to define risks than others. Not all actors really benefit from the reflexivity of risk – only those with real scope to define their own risks. Risk exposure is replacing class as the principal inequality of modern society, because of how risk is reflexively defined by actors: "In risk society *relations of definition* are to be conceived analogous to Marx's relations of production." The inequalities of definition enable powerful actors to maximize risks for "others" and minimize risks for "themselves." Risk definition, essentially, is a power game. This is especially true for world risk society where Western governments or powerful economic actors define risks for others.

Risk makes its appearance on the world stage when God leaves it. Risks presuppose human decisions. They are the partly positive, partly negative, Janus-faced consequences of human decisions and interventions. In relation to risks there is inevitably posed the highly explosive question of social accountability and responsibility, and this is also true where the prevailing rules allow for accountability only in extremely exceptional cases. The acknowledged, decision-governed social roots of risks make it completely impossible to externalize the problem of accountability. Someone, on the other hand, who believes in a personal God has at his disposal a room for maneuver and a meaning for his actions in the face of threats and catastrophes. Through prayers and good works people can win God's favour and forgiveness, and in this way actively contribute not only to their own salvation but also to that of their family and community. There is, therefore, a close connection between secularization and risk (Joost van Loon). When Nietzsche announces that God is dead, that has the – ironic – consequence that from now on human beings must find (or invent) their own explanations and justifications for the disasters which threaten them.

The theory of world risk society maintains, however, that modern societies are shaped by new kinds of risks, that their foundations are shaken by the global anticipation of global catastrophes. Such perceptions of global risk are characterized by three features:

*De-localization:* Its causes and consequences are not limited to one geographical location or space; they are in principle omnipresent.

*Incalculableness:* Its consequences are in principle incalculable; at bottom it is a matter of "hypothetical" risks, which, not least, are based on science-induced not-knowing and normative dissent.

*Non*-*compensatibility:* The security dream of first modernity was based on the scientific utopia of making the unsafe consequences and dangers of decisions ever more controllable; accidents could occur, as long as and because they were considered compensatible. If the climate has changed irreversibly, if progress in human genetics makes irreversible interventions in human existence possible, if terrorist groups already have weapons of mass destruction available to them, then it is too late. Given this new quality of "threats to humanity" – argues François Ewald1 – the logic of compensation breaks down and is replaced by the principle of *precaution through prevention.* Not only is prevention taking precedence over compensation; we are also trying to anticipate and prevent risks whose existence has not been proved.

World risk society is faced by the awkward problem of having to make decisions about life and death, war and peace, on the basis of more or less unadmitted not-knowing. Because the dilemma lies also in the fact that the option which relies on there being no danger is equally based on not-knowing and is equally high-risk, in the sense that terrorists really could acquire weapons of mass destruction, and do so precisely because we believe in not being able to know and hence do nothing. In other words: The non-compensatibility comes to a head in tragic fashion; if risks are held to be noncompensatible, the problem of not-knowing is radicalized. If catastrophes are anticipated whose potential for destruction ultimately threatens everyone, then a risk calculation based on experience and rationality breaks down. Now all possible, more or less improbable scenarios have to be taken into consideration; to knowledge, therefore, drawn from experience and science there now also has to be added imagination, suspicion, fiction, fear.2 The boundary between rationality and hysteria becomes blurred. Given the right invested in them to avert dangers, politicians, in particular, may easily be forced to proclaim a security which they cannot honor, because the *political* costs of omission are much higher than the costs of overreaction. In future, therefore, it is not going to be easy, in the context of state promises of security and a mass media hungry for catastrophes, actively to limit and prevent a diabolical power game with the hysteria of not-knowing. I do not even dare think about deliberate attempts to instrumentalize this situation.

*From trustee to suspect:* Global risks are the expression of a new form of global interdependence, which cannot be adequately addressed by way of national politics, nor of the available forms of international co-operation. All of the past and present practical experiences of human beings in dealing with uncertainty now exist side by side, without offering any ready solution to the resulting problems. Not only that: key institutions of modernity such as science, business and politics, which are supposed to guarantee rationality and security, find themselves confronted by situations in which their apparatus no longer has a purchase and the fundamental principles of modernity no longer automatically hold good. Indeed, the perception of their rating changes – from trustee to suspect. They are seen no longer only as instruments of risk *management* but also as a *source* of risk.

*Tragic individualization:* As a consequence, everyday life in world risk society is characterized by a new variant of individualization. The individual must cope with the uncertainty of the global world by himself or herself. Here individualization is a default

outcome of a *failure* of expert systems to manage risks. Neither science nor the politics in power, nor the mass media, nor business, nor the law or even the military are in a position to define or control risks rationally. The individual is forced to distrust the promises of rationality of these key institutions. As a consequence, people are thrown back on to themselves, they are alienated from expert systems but have nothing else instead. *Disembedding without embedding* – this is the ironic–tragic formula for this dimension of individualization in world risk society. For example, responsibility for the decision on genetically modified foods and their unforeseeable, unknowable long-term consequences is ultimately dumped on the so-called "responsible consumer." (Consumer choice rules.) The appeal to "responsibility" is the cynicism with which the institutions whitewash their own failure. However – and this is also part of the tragic irony of this individualization process – the individual whose senses fail her in the face of ungraspable threats to civilization, who, thrown back on herself, is blind to dangers, remains at the same time unable to escape the power of definition of expert systems, whose judgment she cannot yet must trust. Sustaining an individual self of integrity in world risk society is indeed a tragic affair.

*World risk society produces new lines of conflict:* Unlike the national industrial society of first modernity, which was marked by socio-economic conflicts between labor and capital, and unlike the international conflict constellations of the East–West conflict, which were characterized by questions of political security, the lines of conflict of world risk society are *cultural* ones. To the extent that global risks evade calculation by scientific methods, are a matter of not-knowing, then the *cultural perception*, that is, the post-religious, quasi-religious *belief* in the reality of world risk assumes a key significance.

Central, however, are not, as with Huntington, traditional religiously grounded "civilizations," but opposing risk belief religions. We are dealing – to adapt Huntington – with the *clash of risk cultures, risk religions*. So, for example, the dominant risk belief and risk tendencies of Europe and the US government are drifting very far apart; because the risk religions contradict one another, Europeans and Americans live in different worlds. For Europeans, risk belief issues like climate change, perhaps even the threats which global financial movements pose for individual countries, are much more important than the threat of terrorism. While, as far as the Americans are concerned, the Europeans are suffering from an environmental hysteria, many Europeans see the Americans as struck by a terrorism hysteria. The reversal of the terms "secularism" and "religiosity" is also striking. It seems that religious cultures are marked by a "risk secularism." Whoever believes in God is a risk atheist.

Like religious wars in pre-modernity or the conflict of interest between capital and labor in first modernity, that is, class conflicts, the clash of risk cultures is the fundamental conflict of second modernity:

- (1) this is a matter of life and death, not of individuals or individual nations, but potentially of everyone;
- (2) precisely these decisions central to the physical and moral survival of mankind have to be made within a horizon of more or less admitted and disputed notknowing, and they are socially not assignable.

(3) In many areas the experimental logic of trial and error breaks down. It is impossible to permit just a small amount of genetically modified food, just a small amount of nuclear energy, just a small amount of therapeutic cloning. Given the cultural differences in risk perception, the question is posed: How much tolerance in the face of the ignorance of others can we afford? Or: How can binding procedures and standards of regulation be agreed given cultural differences in perception and not-knowing with respect to the consequences of decisions, which change the anthropological character of being human? Here two contradictory risk philosophies come into conflict: The philosophy of *laissez-faire* – it is safe as long as it has not been proved to be dangerous; and the philosophy of precaution – nothing is safe as long as it has not been proved harmless.

BSE is an explosive reminder of the inability of both nation-states and transnational decision-making bodies like the EU to manage risk in a chaotically interacting world risk society. But this is only the beginning. In developing the technologies of the future – genetic technology, nanotechnology and robotics – we are opening up a Pandora's Box. Genetic modification, communications technology and artificial intelligence, now also being combined with one another, undermine the state's monopoly of the use of force and leave the door wide open to an individualization of war – unless effective measures are taken soon at global level to bolt it shut.

*Let me summarize*: The theory of world risk society addresses the increasing realization of the irrepressible ubiquity of radical uncertainty in the modern world. The basic institutions, the actors of first modernity – science and expert systems, the state, commerce and the international system, including the military – responsible for calculating and controlling manufactured uncertainties are undermined by growing awareness that they are inefficient, their actions even counterproductive. This does not happen haphazardly, but systematically. Radicalization of modernity produces this fundamental irony of risk: science, the state and the military are becoming part of the problem they are supposed to solve. This is what "reflexive modernization" means: We are not living in a *post*-modern world, but in a *more*-modern world. It is not the crisis but the *victory* of modernity which through the logics of unintended and unknown side-effects undermines basic institutions of first modernity.

#### Notes

- 1. Ewald, François (2002). "The Return of Descartes's Malicious Demon: An Outline of a Philosophy of Precaution," in Tom Baker and Jonathan Simon (eds), *Embracing Risk: The Changing Culture of Insurance and Responsibility* (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press).
- 2. ibid.
