---
images: []
order: 314
title: SVEN OVE HANSSON
---

In the late 1960s, increased public attention to technological risks gave rise to a wave of academic activities related to risk. Scientists and scholars from a wide range of disciplines, often in new interdisciplinary combinations, started to investigate risks and risk-taking in new perspectives. Much of the focus was on chemicals and on nuclear technology, the same risk factors that public opposition had targeted. The new field was institutionalized as the discipline of "risk analysis," with professional societies, research institutes and journals of its own. The major journal in the field, *Risk Analysis*, was launched in 1981. The leading professional society, the Society for Risk Analysis, sees risk analysis as "broadly defined to include risk assessment, risk characterization, risk communication, risk management, and policy relating to risk" (www.sra.org).

Risk analysis has several subdisciplines. *Probabilistic risk analysis (PRA)* is primarily devoted to the analysis of technological systems. One of its major tools is fault tree analysis, in which the various chains of events that may lead to an accident are identified, and their probabilities estimated. The major problem with this methodology is of course that there is no method by which we can identify all chains of events that may lead to a major accident, for instance, in a nuclear reactor or in any other complex technological system. In spite of this, the construction and analysis of such event chains can be an efficient way to identify weaknesses in a complex technological system.

*Health risk analysis* identifies the risks that various health hazards, such as chemicals, radiation, unhealthy diet, etc., can give rise to. In most cases, health risk analysis begins with hazard analysis, i.e. an inventory of possible negative health effects of the agent in question. This is followed by an estimate of dose–response relationships, i.e. of what effects can be expected at different levels of exposure. In some cases, estimates of hazards and dose–response relationships can be based on studies of exposed human populations, but more commonly animal experiments provide the best available data for these estimates. Finally, exposure analysis is an indispensable part of health risk analysis. In order to determine the risks to exposed humans, both the exposure and the dose–response relationships have to be known.

*Ecological risk assessment* identifies the risks to wildlife and to ecological systems from exposure to chemical substances. The major scientific disciplines that contribute to ecological risk assessment are ecotoxicology, which investigates the effects of chemical

substances on non-human organisms, and environmental chemistry, which investigates the fate of chemicals in the natural environment.

*Risk–benefit analysis* is a subdiscipline of economics that makes calculations that can be used to weigh risks against benefits. The study of economic risk-taking (where the risks are economic losses) is part of mainstream economics and is usually not counted as part of risk analysis.

*Risk perception* is a subdiscipline of psychology, devoted to studies of how people perceive the severity of different types of risk and of the factors that influence their appraisals of risk.

*Risk communication* is another behavioral subdiscipline in risk analysis. It investigates the effects of various types of communication on the public's perception of risk. In recent years, there has been a shift of focus in risk communication studies from one-sided to dialogical communication.

Practical applications of risk analysis to decision-making have usually been based on a thought model that has been developed out of attempts to systematize the work carried out by regulatory agencies and summarized in an influential 1983 report by the American National Academy of Sciences (NAS) (*Risk Assessment in the Federal Government: Managing the Process*). The characteristic feature of this approach is the division of risk decision procedures into two distinct parts to be performed consecutively. The first of these, commonly called *risk assessment*, is a scientific undertaking. It consists of collecting and assessing the relevant scientific and other factual information and on this base characterizing the risks. The second procedure is called *risk management*. Contrary to risk assessment, this is not a scientific undertaking. Its starting-point is the outcome of risk assessment, which it combines with economic and technological information pertaining to various ways of reducing or eliminating the risk in question, and also with political and social information. Based on this, a decision is made on what measures – if any – should be taken to reduce the risk.

This consecutive model has served the important purpose of systematizing a previously much too unsystematic undertaking. In particular, it has served to defend the integrity of science and to prevent improper practices such as letting estimates of risk depend on whether or not risk reduction is considered feasible. On the other hand, a rigid implementation of this model also has several disadvantages. Perhaps most importantly, the model has often been interpreted as saying that risk assessment must be "completed" before risk management can start. This can sometimes lead to unnecessary delays of risk abatement. Modifications of the model that facilitate decisions based on preliminary conclusions can increase the efficiency of risk management.
