---
images: []
order: 316
title: Economic Prosperity and Innovation
---

*Prosperity* has economic connotations, but its dictionary definition is broader, referring to thriving and success rather than to just monetary riches. For most of prehistoric days, prosperity meant living in a benign climate with ample wild game, abundant plant resources, and security from attack by other bands of humans. The *Neolithic revolution*, as classically described by V. Gordon Childe, was launched by the invention of agriculture, leading to population growth, political and military institutions to defend land, division of labor producing a greater variety of goods and services, and cultural advances such as writing and organized religion. Occurring first around ten thousand years ago, the Neolithic revolution gradually built the technical, demographic and economic basis for the industrial revolution, starting around 250 years ago. If prosperity is the greatest good for the greatest number, then the millennia-long progress of technology symbolized by these putative revolutions has increased human prosperity by something like a million times, from a hunter-gatherer population of ten or twenty thousand at the dawn of humanity to 6 billion today, roughly two-thirds of whom could be described as fabulously wealthy by ancient standards.

It is not at all clear that technological progress is faster today than decades ago, nor that innovation is currently playing a greater role in promoting prosperity. A case can be made that household electrification in the early twentieth century was more important in transforming life than the spread of the Internet at the end of the century,

and that the introduction of telephones and automobiles was more important than email. The rate of increase of the lifespan was greater a century ago than today in industrial nations. Alexander Field has argued that the 1930s were the decade in which technological innovation had the greatest impact on American economic growth. John Horgan offers evidence that the science on which technological innovation is based has neared its limits in many fields. Granting that we cannot be certain about such matters, what technological factors might affect prosperity in the future?

Evan Schofer, Francisco Ramirez and John Meyer have shown that science, and thus technologies based on it, can have contrary effects on economic growth. Notably, science can retard short-term economic growth when it energizes policy reforms about environmental pollution, human rights, and welfare. On the other hand, major innovations can create entirely new industries that cause a wave of economic advance until they have become well established, for example saturating the market with their products. Kenneth Brown has examined what would happen if American investment in science were to decline markedly. Because other factors, such as savings and capital investment, promote growth, the lack of new technologies might not seem significant at first. Scientific and technological stasis would set a ceiling on long-term economic growth, however.

Economists generally believe that international trade helps underdeveloped nations grow toward prosperity, and globalization depends upon modern transportation and communication technologies. A crucial factor causing growth in poor but economically open countries may be the influx of scientific and technical knowledge that comes along with international trade. Impoverished, poorly educated nations must import their science if they are to have any at all. Knowledge enters an open nation through the technology brought in by foreign companies, across the imported train tracks and phone lines, in the minds of students sent abroad for their education, and even in the pages of foreign books and on the Worldwide Web. Thus, the technologies that already exist could support many decades of continued economic progress on the global scale.
