---
images: []
order: 317
title: The Information Age
---

People should be wary of anyone who proclaims the dawn of a new era. The "Atomic Age" and the "Space Age" were quickly forgotten when the technologies after which they were named stalled in the 1960s and 1970s. The same innovations that gave us nuclear power plants and space satellites also gave us atomic warheads on intercontinental ballistic missiles, perhaps to the net harm of humanity. Thus we can doubt whether the Information Age is a real revolution in the basic conditions of human life, or, if it is, whether it is on balance a benefit for prosperity and well-being.

Economists have come to recognize the value of information in markets. Companies need to distinguish good from poor potential employees, and so the educational system acts as the credentialing institution. Consumers want reliable means of identifying products that meet their own cost–quality tradeoff, so brand loyalty arises. Information is costly, both directly to the person seeking it and indirectly through the cost of societal institutions like schools that support it. Brand loyalty is costly because brands demand a premium price. There is some question whether markets could function if everybody has perfect information. For example, if online reputation systems like that used by eBay work very well, then competing manufacturers and distribution companies may not be able to charge enough to provide profits to their owners, in a race to the bottom in which the lowest price attracts all consumers seeking products or services they easily learn are equal in quality.

In 1983, Wassily Leontief noted the transformation that information technology had begun to achieve, and predicted: "As soon as not only the physical but also the controlling 'mental' functions involved in the production of goods and services can be performed without the participation of human labor, labor's role as an indispensable 'factor of production' will progressively diminish" (p. 405). He argued that humans could be treated as horses were when gasoline-powered vehicles took over their tasks: dispensed with. The result could be increased unemployment, or underemployment when people take very low-paying service jobs in preference to no jobs at all. At some point in this process of devaluing human work, a large enough fraction of consumers could be poor enough to put the brakes on economic growth. Alternatively, the wealthy classes could keep their own prosperity growing by investing in large projects that operated above the mass consumer economy, such as architectural extravaganzas, lavish vices, or military campaigns.

A more recent perspective holds that the effect of new technologies on work organization, and the effects that work has on human lives, is contingent upon a number of factors, including policy decisions about how the roles of technology and workers are defined with respect to each other. This may be why research on the introduction of computers into the work environment gives complex and often contradictory results, notably the paradox that productivity does not automatically increase.

In the title of his 1964 book, *Psychotherapy: The Purchase of Friendship*, William Schofield approached but did not quite comprehend a major insight. All service industries involve the purchase of friendship. Mutually beneficial human cooperation has been the foundation of society since long before *Homo sapiens* evolved; but, as George Homans pointed out long ago, human nature expects practical services and emotional friendship to be combined, in the dynamics of small human groups. Thus it is possible to argue that service industries should first offload all repetitive tasks on machines, and then intentionally use human labor in an "inefficient" manner, such that a doctor or auto mechanic behaves like a real friend to the client.
