---
images: []
order: 320
title: Preamble
---

A cultural movement has arisen within science and technology aimed at the unification of theories, methods and goals across fields. This convergence has tremendous potential in the so-called "NBIC" fields of nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology and new technologies based on cognitive science. A series of conferences, some organized officially by the United States government but others organized by scientists and engineers separately from government support, have especially examined how convergence could leverage developments in the National Nanotechnology Initiative to transform the conditions of human life.

### The NBIC Fields

*Nanotechnology*, as conventionally defined, is a very general term for engineering materials, structures and devices in which at least some dimensions are less than 100 nanometers (billionths of a meter). By the end of the twentieth century, visionaries and science-fiction writers had convinced many people that self-reproducing nanoscale robots or automatic nanoscale factories for molecular manufacturing would soon be developed. When the United States government organized the first serious examination of the societal implications of nanotechnology in 2000, however, the consensus of expert opinion was that these dreams were at least fifty years in the future, but nanotechnology could have a great impact through incremental performance improvements across a wide range of existing technologies. Thus, "nano" would not be a revolution but an enabler, assisting progress through convergence with other technologies.

Already, computer hardware exploits the speed and efficiency of transistors with components less than 50 nanometers across, and nanoscale layers give hard disks significantly increased data capacity. As computing becomes ubiquitous and mobile, components must become smaller and lighter. Sensor networks will identify individual molecules for such applications as environmental monitoring, medical diagnosis, and defense against biohazards. Thus, nano–info convergence is not only taking place but also reaching in the direction of biotechnology.

Nano–bio convergence is evident in the concepts and methods used to study the nanoscale machinery inside living cells, and it joins with information technology to enable rapid gene sequencing and genetic engineering. The nervous systems of animals and humans depend upon many phenomena that operate at the nanoscale, from the reaction of pigment molecules like rhodopsin as they respond to light in the eye, to the flow of neurotransmitters across the gaps between neurons. Thus convergence reaches beyond nanotechnology, information technology and biotechnology toward cognitive technology.

The inclusion of cognitive science is controversial, in part because there still exists considerable cultural opposition to the very idea that the human "soul" or "spirit" can be studied scientifically, reflected in far lower levels of public financial support for research in the behavioral and social sciences than in the physical or biological sciences. There also exists considerable political opposition, especially in the United States where Republican administrations currying favor with evangelicals and conservatives continually seek to suppress the social and cognitive sciences on the theory that they are mere left-wing ideologies. While this criticism is poorly grounded, it is true that NBIC convergence is likely to undercut traditional beliefs, values and institutions.

### Philosophical Implications of Convergence

The technologies cannot unite unless the sciences also do so. This means that converging fields must develop shared languages, theories and educational curricula. The ultimate result could be the emergence of a universal set of scientific principles, the consensus of science about how the universe functions and the universal toolkit employed by engineers to transform the material conditions of human life. For example, the biological concept of evolution by natural selection from random variation has been adapted by computer scientists in genetic algorithms and evolutionary computing methods.

Importantly, the scientists and engineers who participated in the landmark NBIC and nano conferences expect substantial changes in human nature to result. Note the titles of two of the conference volumes: *Converging Technologies for Improving Human Performance* and *The Coevolution of Human Potential and Converging Technologies*. In order to compete with each other, individuals, corporations and nations may need to embrace convergence, with the unintended consequence that the rules of competition may constantly change as human nature is altered by the NBIC technologies.

Already, in such areas as human–computer interaction and robotics, major fields of information technology research and development, the distinction between human and machine cognition is blurring. Smart machines from videogames to office information systems are progressively designed to think more like humans, whereas the humans who use them come to mirror the machine's mental habits as well. Arguably, one machine is already more intelligent than any human, and its name is Google; but Google is smart only because it exploits the judgments of literally millions of people. At the same time, cyberinfrastructure (supercomputers, digital libraries, and research collaboratories) is transforming all modes of scientific data analysis and theorizing into subsets of computer science.

The new "technorthodoxy" could gain great social power from effective technologies based on it, notably genetic engineering and artificial intelligence. Influential sociobiologist Edward O. Wilson advocates scientific unification, calling it *consilience*, and predicts that religion will find itself left out of this grand convergence. One could argue that a worldwide, coherent scientific culture could become the technical basis for cultural pluralism in the humanities, social systems and matters of faith. Thus, it is unclear whether religion and the arts would be subordinate to science or independent from it. When everything that could become possible is actually possible, humans will need to decide what they really want.
