---
images: []
order: 324
title: ALFRED NORDMANN
---

There are at least two ways of defining nanotechnology. On the one hand, it is the seemingly unlimited technical potential that will arise from at present still rudimentary capabilities of visualizing and manipulating molecular structure. On the other hand, it is an umbrella term for a variety of nanotechnological research programs that aim for functional materials, for targeted drug delivery, for molecular wires and faster computers, for lab-on-a-chip sensors, for extremely fine filters, for smart textiles, for tagging and monitoring, and much more.1

There are also at least two ways of posing the question regarding prosperity and risk. One can ask what our nanotechnological future has in store for us, what benefits and risks will come with the development of nanotechnology. One can also ask how our current societal or environmental problems might be addressed with the help of this or some other nanotechnological research program.

In both cases, we either refer to an unspecified future in which a vast but vague potential may or may not be realized, or we remain in the present by referring to ongoing funded research programs, including the visions of a better society that may or may not inform them. In the former case, nanotechnology is promise and threat all wrapped into one; in the latter case, specific nanotechnological research is justified to the extent that it builds on presently demonstrable capabilities and contributes to the solution of well-defined problems.

The tension between futurist and presentist conceptions of nanotechnology is unresolved. The dynamic of nanotechnological development feeds on this unresolved tension. Reflection on this dynamic is therefore a major theme in nanoScience and Technology Studies (nSTS).2,3,4,5,6,7 The futurist conception has come under pressure not only for the obvious epistemological problem that one cannot predict the future, but also for, broadly speaking, ethical and political reasons: Is there an ethically defensible standpoint from which to judge future technologies? Does a discourse about broad but vague prospects detract from particular choices that need to be made now? Reflections on issues of prosperity, risk, justice, or sustainability require a conceptually manageable presentation of nanotechnological programs. The price to pay for this is to give up the illusory hope that one could now worry about or prepare for a remote, unknown and unknowable future.

There are further reasons to intervene in the systematically ambiguous rhetoric of "nanotechnology" and to disambiguate futurist and presentist conceptions. These reasons involve specific limits of knowledge and technical control of nanoscale phenomena. Here, nSTS scholarship has focused on the very conceptions of uncertainty or risk and the emergence of nanotoxicology.

Jean-Pierre Dupuy and Sven Ove Hansson highlight the distinction between known and unknown risks, between epistemic uncertainty and objective indeterminacy.8,9 Epistemic uncertainty concerns our current state of knowledge: Given what is presently known, we cannot exclude, for example, that some chemical substance might pose a risk to human health. Accordingly, epistemic uncertainty serves as an index on propositions, hypotheses, or beliefs, indicating the incompleteness of knowledge. This uncertainty is oriented toward a future state at which greater certainty can and will be achieved: Once the data on exposure, on frequency and severity of incidents have been collected, a definitive judgment on the risks posed by the substance will be possible.

In contrast, objective indeterminacy is an irreducible property of a physical system. The system behaves in such a way that one cannot attain any assurance that would exclude a catastrophe from happening. If one takes the claims made on behalf of nanotechnologies seriously, there is good reason to expect that nanotechnological risk assessment takes place under conditions of objective indeterminacy. Dupuy points to the emphasis on "bottom-up engineering." Nanotechnologies are said to harness processes of self-organization which allow them to build structures through the self-assembly of molecules. Self-organization is frequently associated with non-linear dynamics and conceptions of ordered states emerging from chaotic states – this, of course, is also called "catastrophe theory." Indeed, at the tipping-point of self-organizing systems there is objective indeterminacy whether the emerging state is catastrophic collapse or a desirable state of greater complexity.

While it is an open question whether nanotechnological bottom-up engineering actually involves such a strong conception of self-organization, the argument regarding objective indeterminacy does not depend on it.10,11 Even the most general definitions of nanotechnology refer to scale-dependent discontinuities. Nanotechnological research seeks to exploit the fact that familiar substances have different properties when they are scaled down to the point at which a great proportion of their atoms are close to their surface. Bulk matter is appropriately characterized by chemical composition alone, and its surface can usually be neglected. When materials are dominated by surface properties, however, their behavior depends not on chemical composition alone but also on size, surface characteristics and structure. The expected behavior is therefore highly sensitive to a whole variety of factors that are difficult to control individually, let alone at once. And, even if it were possible to achieve such control and a physically robust exploitation of some novel property, it is hard to limit the scope of this novelty. A nanoparticle might be engineered for its specific ability to absorb light; but, while an entire field of scientific research is built around the toxicity and biocompatibility of chemical properties, there is no such science for engineered properties and functionalities. Not surprisingly, therefore, the analogy to asbestos has been invoked repeatedly, since it was the structure of asbestos fibers rather than their chemical composition that proved to be hazardous.12 As with asbestos, it may be difficult to gain definitive knowledge until after the fact, that is, until results are available from long-term epidemiological

studies of sufficiently large populations with significant levels of exposure. Unlike the case of asbestos, however, early warnings are not being ignored and ways are being sought to deal with questions of risk in a situation characterized by objective indeterminacy.13

Currently predominant views of risk and precaution are epistemic in that they depend on what is currently known about hazards, exposures, incidence, and what one would need to know before giving a green light to further research or market distribution. When this road is not available under conditions of objective indeterminacy, the best of our knowledge is still taken into consideration, still needs to be updated and improved. However, toxicological and epidemiological information can only contribute to a more broadly conceived process of testing, observing and monitoring the robustness of a technical system. Indeed, a desideratum for nSTS is to develop criteria for the robustness of socio-technical systems in their environments. While these criteria will not be formally stringent like those proposed for the assessment of propositional knowledgeclaims, they will include social robustness, that is, how firmly nanotechnological research-programs are entrenched within the larger aspirations of a society.14

The demand for a socially robust method of continuous justification, observation, research and deliberation is particularly strong in the emerging field of nanotoxicology. Here chemical toxicology, occupational health, inhalation toxicology and various other subfields come together to strengthen a disciplinary identity that is based on the traditional tools and methods that have served well in the development of regulatory mechanisms for fine particles and chemical substances. The fact that these traditional tools and methods reach their limits at the nanoscale could threaten disciplinary identity.15 Instead, it apparently provides an added opportunity for the emerging field to reinvent itself as a nanoscience.16,17 On the one hand, toxicology might move from the position of being a merely reactive testing science to a proactive knowledgeprovider that paves the way for biocompatible nanotechnology. It can do so by informing nanotechnological research and development of relevant strategies for selecting its building blocks, the treatment of surfaces, etc.18 At the same time, toxicology might further expand its interdisciplinary character by including the social sciences and becoming a social science of nature.19 Epidemiological vigilance would be framed by deliberations on the societal benefits and institutional arrangements that might justify the assumption of unknown risks.

The term "social science of nature" was coined in the 1980s in the context of the so-called finalization thesis.20 Its point of departure was the recognition that technoscientific research does not represent a unique and unchangeable nature but pursues as its program the shaping and reshaping of a world that is already the product of technical interventions.21 If nature is no longer just natural but also social, the science of nature is also no longer natural but also social. As a science of judging how nanotechnical materials and devices can function in a socially and technically robust manner, nanotoxicology can show the way for the larger ambitions of embedding nanotechnological research within a convergence of enabling technologies ("converging sciences and technologies for bio- and sociocompatible technical systems").22

In the discourse of technology and the future, the notions of prosperity and risk play a highly reductive role. In light of the many unknowns that the future may hold, they signal the presumed certainties that technological innovation leads to prosperity, that the most serious obstacle to this is perceptions of real or imagined risk. In this context

#### alfred nordmann

the meaning of these terms is limited to their rhetorical and epistemological function in a public discourse that is oriented toward assurances of a "sustainable" future. However, in the context of the problems, technical capacities and needs of the present, prosperity and risk are implicated in the piecemeal transformations of highly complex sociotechnical systems. Richly contextualized, these terms no longer serve to orient discourse to impoverished conceptions of protection from physical harm and growth of GNP. As Brian Wynne has shown for nanoethics, the evaluation of nanotechnological development moves from calculated impacts to social imagination when it is informed by lay ethics, by recognition of silent "others," by various sources of expertise and deliberative processes. Beyond the presumed benefit/presumed risk calculus, a social science of nature requires imagination for the ways in which nanotechnologies might alter the fabric of human relations.23

Brian Wynne's critique of "risk" is matched by Joachim Schummer's work on "prosperity" as the envisioned aim of nanotechnology. To be sure, visions of "global abundance" have informed futurist visions of nanotechnology from the beginning.24 The arguments for public investment in nanotechnological research invariably refer to growing numbers of patents, anticipated increases in market-share and volume of nanotechnological products. These arguments have been shadowed by a concern whether the developing world can profit from these developments or whether they will widen existing gaps.25 Schummer's review of nanotechnologies for the developing countries is sobering and highlights the magnitude of the task.26 In the mean time, funding for nanotechnology raises questions of distributive justice: Who benefits and who pays?27 In particular, this question might be addressed to nanomedical research that is focused not on infectious diseases but primarily on cancer and thus on an incremental extension of already-high life-expectancy in an affluent ageing population. And a variant of this question arises with respect to the environmental promises that are made on behalf of nanotechnologies. On futurist conceptions, environmental problems will take care of themselves once waste-free and resource-efficient modes of manufacturing are in place. By holding nanotechnological research and development to the demands and ecological problems of the present, one might insist that public investment in nanotechnology should be proportionate to its promises of environmental remediation.

Questions of risk and of prosperity and risk can thus become richly contextual once we realize that nanotechnology's storyline is not primarily that of human progress toward greater wealth, global abundance, ever expanded scientific understanding and technical control – but that its storyline is that of globalization: sailing under the flag of "nanotechnology," we are presently embarked upon the conquest of nanospace and thus upon a contentious project to reform the web of human relations and the world of lived experience.28

#### Notes

1. Joachim Schummer, "Identifying Ethical Issues of Nanotechnologies," in Henk ten Have (ed.), *Nanotechnology: Science, Ethics and Politics* (Paris: UNESCO Publishing, 2007), pp. 79–98.

- 2. Alfred Nordmann, "No Future for Nanotechnology? Historical Development vs. Global Expansion," in Fabrice Jotterand (ed.), *Emerging Conceptual, Ethical and Policy Issues in Bionanotechnology* (Dordrecht: Springer, 2008), pp. 43–63.
- 3. Jean-Pierre Dupuy, *Pour un catastrophisme éclairé: quand l'impossible est certain* (Paris: Seuil, 2002); "Complexity and Uncertainty: A Prudential Approach to Nanotechnology," in Fritz Allhoff, Patrick Lin, James Moor, John Weckert (eds), *Nanoethics: The Ethical and Social Implications of Nanotechnology* (Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley, 2007), pp. 119–31.
- 4. Armin Grunwald, "Nanotechnologie als Chiffre der Zukunft," in Alfred Nordmann, Joachim Schummer, and Astrid Schwarz (eds), *Nanotechnologien im Kontext: Philosophische, ethische, gesellschaftliche Perspektiven* (Berlin: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft, 2006), pp. 49–80.
- 5. Andreas Lösch, "Anticipating the Futures of Nanotechnology: Visionary Images as Means of Communication," *Technology Analysis and Strategic Management (TASM)*, vol. 18 (2006), no. 3–4, Special Issue on the Sociology of Expectations in Science and Technology, pp. 393–409; "The Defuturization of the Media: Dynamics in the Visual Constitution of Nanotechnology," in Mario Kaiser, Monika Kurath, Sabine Maasen and Christoph Rehmann-Sutter (eds), *Assessment Regimes of Technology: Regulation, Deliberation and Identity Politics of Nanotechnology* (Dordrecht: Springer, 2008).
- 6. Cynthia Selin, "Time Matters: Harmony and Dissonance in Nanotechnology Networks," *Time and Society*, vol. 15 (2006), no. 1, pp. 121–39; Cynthia Selin, "Expectations and the Emergence of Nanotechnology," *Science, Technology and Human Values*, vol. 32 (2007), no. 2, pp. 196–220; Valerie Hanson, "The Role of Anticipatory Rhetorics in Discussions of Nanotechnological Ethics," Presentation at the Nanoethics Conference in Columbia, South Carolina, March 2005; Mario Kaiser, "Futures Assessed: How Technology Assessment, Ethics and Think Tanks Appropriate Nanotechnology's Future." in Mario Kaiser, Monika Kurath, Sabine Maasen and Christoph Rehmann-Sutter (eds), *Assessment Regimes of Technology: Regulation, Deliberation and Identity Politics of Nanotechnology* (Dordrecht: Springer, 2008).
- 7. Robin Williams, "Compressed Foresight and Narrative Bias: Pitfalls in Assessing High Technology Futures," *Science as Culture*, vol. 15 (2006), no. 4, pp. 327–48.
- 8. Jean-Pierre Dupuy, "Complexity and Uncertainty: A Prudential Approach to Nanotechnology," in Fritz Allhoff, Patrick Lin, James Moor and John Weckert (eds), *Nanoethics: The Ethical and Social Implications of Nanotechnology* (Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley, 2007), pp. 119–31.
- 9. Sven Ove Hansson, "Great Uncertainty about Small Things," *Techné*, vol. 8 (2004), no. 2; also published in Joachim Schummer and Davis Baird (eds), *Nanotechnology Challenges: Implications for Philosophy, Ethics and Society* (Singapore: World Scientific Publishing, 2006), pp. 315–25.
- 10. Shuguang Zhang, "Another Brick in the Wall," *Nature Nanotechnology,* vol. 1 (2006), no. 3, pp. 169–70.
- 11. G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, "Self-assembly at All Scales," *Science*, vol. 295 (2002), pp. 2418–21.
- 12. Annabelle Hett, *Nanotechnology Small Matter, Many Unknowns* (Zurich: Swiss Reinsurance Company, 2004).
- 13. D. Gee and M. Greenberg, "Asbestos: From 'Magic' to Malevolent Mineral," in P. Harremoes, D. Gee, M. MacGarvin, A. Stirling, J. Keys, B. Wynne and S. Guedes Vaz (eds), *The Precautionary Principle in the 20th Century: Late Lessons from Early Warnings* (London: Sage, 2002), pp. 49–63.
- 14. H. Nowotny, P. Scott and M. Gibbons, *Re-Thinking Science. Knowledge and the Public in an Age of Uncertainty* (Cambridge: Polity, 2001).
- 15. Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly-Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR), *Opinion on the Appropriateness of the Risk Assessment Methodology in Accordance with the Technical*

#### alfred nordmann

- *Guidance Documents for New and Existing Substances for Assessing the Risks of Nanomaterials* (Brussels: European Commission Health and Consumer Protection DG, 2007).
- 16. Monika Kurath and Sabine Maasen, "Disziplinäre Identitätsbildung neu gedacht? Toxikologie als Nanowissenschaft?," in Alfred Nordmann, Joachim Schummer and Astrid Schwarz (eds), *Nanotechnologien im Kontext* (Berlin: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft, 2006), pp. 397–418.
- 17. Monika Kurath and Sabine Maasen, "Toxicology as a Nanoscience? Disciplinary Identities Reconsidered," *Particle and Fiber Toxicology*, vol. 3 (2006), no. 6.
- 18. Vicky Colvin, "Sustainability for Nanotechnology," *Scientist*, vol. 18 (2004), no. 16, pp. 26–7; compare R. Monastersky, "The Dark Side of Small. As Nanotechnology Takes Off: Researchers Scramble to Assess Its Risks," *The Chronicle of Higher Education*, vol. 51 (2004), no. 3, p. A12.
- 19. Günther Oberdoerster, Vicki Stone and Ken Donaldson, Ken, "Toxicology of Nanoparticles: A Historical Perspective," *Nanotoxicology*, vol. 1 (2007), pp. 2–25.
- 20. Wolf Schäfer (ed.), *Finalization in Science* (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1983).
- 21. Ivan Amato, *Nanotechnology. Shaping the World Atom by Atom* (Washington, D.C.: National Science and Technology Council, 1999).
- 22. High Level Expert Group, "Foresighting the New Technology Wave," *Converging Technologies – Shaping the Future of European Societies* (Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2004).
- 23. Brian Wynne, "What Could the Foundations of NanoBioInfoethics Be? Some Lateral Thoughts," France–Stanford Foundation Workshop on Nanotechnology and Ethics, Avignon, December 2006, unpublished manuscript.
- 24. B. C. Crandall, *Nanotechnology: Molecular Speculations on Global Abundance* (Cambridge, Mass./London: MIT Press, 1996).
- 25. Anise Mnyusiwalla, Abdallah S. Daar et al., " 'Mind the Gap': Science and Ethics in the Nanotechnology," *Nanotechnology*, vol. 14 (2003), pp. R9–R13.
- 26. Joachim Schummer, "The Impact of Nanotechnologies on Developing Countries," in Fritz Allhoff, Patrick Lin, James Moor and John Weckert (eds), *Nanoethics: The Ethical and Social Implications of Nanotechnology* (Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley, 2007), pp. 291–307.
- 27. Joachim Schummer, "Forschung für die Armen versus Forschung für die Reichen: Verteilungsgerechtigkeit als moralisches Kriterium zur Bewertung der angewandten Chemie," in Clemens Sedmak (ed.), *Option für die Armen: Die Entmarginalisierung des Armutsbegriffs in den Wissenschaften* (Freiburg: Herder, 2005), pp. 605–26.
- 28. Alfred Nordmann, "Design Choices in the Nanoworld: A Space Odyssey," in Marian Deblonde, Lieve Goorden, et al. (eds), *Nano Researchers Facing Choices*, The Dialogue Series, Vol. 10, (Antwerp: Universitair Centrum Sint-Ignatius Antwerpen, 2007), pp. 13–30.
