---
images: []
order: 5
title: PREFACE FOR THE REVISED EDITION
---

It gives me great pleasure to provide this preface to the revised edition of *A Theory of Justice.* Despite many criticisms of the original work, I still accept its main outlines and defend its central doctrines. Of course, I wish, as one might expect, that I had done certain things differently, and I would now make a number of important revisions. But if I were writing *A Theory of Justice* over again, I would not write, as authors sometimes say, a completely different book.

In February and March of 1975 the original English text was considerably revised for the German edition of that year. To the best of my knowledge these revisions have been included in all subsequent translations and no further ones have been added since that time. All translations have, therefore, been made from the same revised text. Since this revised text includes what I believe are significant improvements, the translated editions (provided accuracy is preserved) until now have been superior to the original. This revised edition incorporates these improvements.

Before commenting on the more important revisions and why they were made, I will comment on the conception of justice presented in *A Theory of Justice,* a conception I call "justice as fairness." The central ideas and aims of this conception I see as those of a philosophical conception for a constitutional democracy. My hope is that justice as fairness will seem reasonable and useful, even if not fully convincing, to a wide range of thoughtful political opinions and thereby express an essential part of the common core of the democratic tradition.

The central aims and ideas of that conception I refer to in the preface to the first edition. As I explain in the second and third paragraphs of that preface, I wanted to work out a conception of justice that provides a reasonably systematic alternative to utilitarianism, which in one form or another has long dominated the Anglo-Saxon tradition of political thought. The primary reason for wanting to find such an alternative is the weakness, so I think, of utilitarian doctrine as a basis for the institutions of constitutional democracy. In particular, I do not believe that utilitarianism can provide a satisfactory account of the basic rights and liberties of citizens as free and equal persons, a requirement of absolutely first importance for an account of democratic institutions. I used a more general and abstract rendering of the idea of the social contract by means of the idea of the original position as a way to do that. A convincing account of basic rights and liberties, and of their priority, was the first objective of justice as fairness. A second objective was to integrate that account with an understanding of democratic equality, which led to the principle of fair equality of opportunity and the difference principle.<sup>1</sup>

In the revisions I made in 1975 I removed certain weaknesses in the original edition. These I shall now try to indicate, although I am afraid much of what I say will not be intelligible without some prior knowledge of the text. Leaving this concern aside, one of the most serious weaknesses was in the account of liberty, the defects of which were pointed out by H. L. A. Hart in his critical discussion of 1973. Beginning with §11, I made revisions to clear up several of the difficulties Hart noted. It must be said, however, that the account in the revised text, although considerably improved, is still not fully satisfactory. A better version is found in a later essay of 1982 entitled "The Basic Liberties and Their Priority." This essay attempts to answer what I came to regard as Hart's most important objections. The basic rights and liberties and their priority are there said to guarantee equally for all citizens the social conditions essential for the adequate development and the full and informed exercise of their two moral powers—their capacity for a sense of justice and their capacity for a conception of the good—in what I call the two fundamental cases. Very briefly, the first fundamental case is the application of the principles of justice to the basic structure of society by the exercise of citizens' sense of justice. The second fundamental case is the application of citizens' powers of practical reason and thought in forming, revising, and rationally pursuing their conception of the good. The equal political liberties, including their fair value (an idea introduced in §36), and freedom of thought, liberty of conscience, and freedom of association, are to insure

<sup>1.</sup> For these two principles see §\$12–14 of Chapter II. It is these two principles, and particularly the difference principle, which give justice as fairness its liberal, or social democratic, character.

<sup>2.</sup> See his "Rawls on Liberty and Its Priority," *University of Chicago Law Review*, 40 (1973), pp. 534–555.

<sup>3.</sup> See *Tanner Lectures on Human Values* (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1982), vol. III, pp. 3–87, republished as Lecture VIII in John Rawls, *Political Liberalism* (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993).

that the exercise of the moral powers can be free, informed, and effective in these two cases. These changes in the account of liberty can, I think, fit comfortably within the framework of justice as fairness as found in the revised text.

A second serious weakness of the original edition was its account of primary goods. These were said to be things that rational persons want whatever else they want, and what these were and why was to be explained by the account of goodness in Chapter VII. Unhappily that account left it ambiguous whether something's being a primary good depends solely on the natural facts of human psychology or whether it also depends on a moral conception of the person that embodies a certain ideal. This ambiguity is to be resolved in favor of the latter: persons are to be viewed as having two moral powers (those mentioned above) and as having higher-order interests in developing and exercising those powers. Primary goods are now characterized as what persons need in their status as free and equal citizens, and as normal and fully cooperating members of society over a complete life. Interpersonal comparisons for purposes of political justice are to be made in terms of citizens' index of primary goods and these goods are seen as answering to their needs as citizens as opposed to their preferences and desires. Beginning with §15, I made revisions to convey this change of view, but these revisions fall short of the fuller statement I have given since in an essay, published in 1982, entitled "Social Unity and Primary Goods." As with the changes in the account of the basic liberties, I think the changes required by that statement can be incorporated within the framework of the revised text.

Many other revisions were made, especially in Chapter III and again, though fewer, in Chapter IV. In Chapter III I simply tried to make the reasoning clearer and less open to misunderstanding. The revisions are too numerous to note here, but they do not, I think, depart in any important way from the view of the original edition. After Chapter IV there are few changes. I revised §44 in Chapter V on just savings, again trying to make it clearer; and I rewrote the first six paragraphs of §82 of Chapter IX to correct a serious mistake in the argument for the priority of liberty;<sup>5</sup> and there are further changes in the rest of that section. Perhaps having identified what I regard as the two important changes, those in the ac-

<sup>4.</sup> This essay appears in *Utilitarianism and Beyond*, edited by Amartya Sen and Bernard Williams (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), pp. 159–185; also in John Rawls, *Collected Papers*, edited by Samuel Freeman (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999, chap. 17, pp. 359–387.

<sup>5.</sup> For this mistake see "Basic Liberties and Their Priority," ibid., n. 83, p. 87, or *Political Liberalism*, n. 84, p. 371.

counts of the basic liberties and of primary goods, these indications suffice to convey the nature and extent of the revisions.

If I were writing A Theory of Justice now, there are two things I would handle differently. One concerns how to present the argument from the original position (see Chapter III) for the two principles of justice (see Chapter II). It would have been better to present it in terms of two comparisons. In the first parties would decide between the two principles of justice, taken as a unit, and the principle of (average) utility as the sole principle of justice. In the second comparison, the parties would decide between the two principles of justice and those same principles but for one important change: the principle of (average) utility is substituted for the difference principle. (The two principles after this substitution I called a mixed conception, and here it is understood that the principle of utility is to be applied subject to the constraints of the prior principles: the principle of the equal liberties and the principle of fair equality of opportunity.) Using these two comparisons has the merit of separating the arguments for the equal basic liberties and their priority from the arguments for the difference principle itself. The arguments for the equal basic liberties are at first glance much stronger, as those for the difference principle involve a more delicate balance of considerations. The primary aim of justice as fairness is achieved once it is clear that the two principles would be adopted in the first comparison, or even in a third comparison in which the mixed conception of the second comparison is adopted rather than the principle of utility. I continue to think the difference principle important and would still make the case for it, taking for granted (as in the second comparison) an institutional background that satisfies the two preceding principles. But it is better to recognize that this case is less evident and is unlikely ever to have the force of the argument for the two prior principles.

Another revision I would now make is to distinguish more sharply the idea of a property-owning democracy (introduced in Chapter V) from the idea of a welfare state. These ideas are quite different, but since they both allow private property in productive assets, we may be misled into thinking them essentially the same. One major difference is that the background institutions of property-owning democracy, with its system of (workably) competitive markets, tries to disperse the ownership of wealth and capital, and thus to prevent a small part of society from

<sup>6.</sup> The term "property-owning democracy," as well as some features of the idea, I borrowed from J. E. Meade, *Efficiency, Equality, and the Ownership of Property* (London: G. Allen & Unwin, 1964); see esp. Chapter V.

controlling the economy and indirectly political life itself. Property-owning democracy avoids this, not by redistributing income to those with less at the end of each period, so to speak, but rather by ensuring the widespread ownership of productive assets and human capital (educated abilities and trained skills) at the beginning of each period; all this against a background of equal basic liberties and fair equality of opportunity. The idea is not simply to assist those who lose out through accident or misfortune (although this must be done), but instead to put all citizens in a position to manage their own affairs and to take part in social cooperation on a footing of mutual respect under appropriately equal conditions.

Note here two different conceptions of the aim of political institutions over time. In a welfare state the aim is that none should fall below a decent standard of life, and that all should receive certain protections against accident and misfortune—for example, unemployment compensation and medical care. The redistribution of income serves this purpose when, at the end of each period, those who need assistance can be identified. Such a system may allow large and inheritable inequities of wealth incompatible with the fair value of the political liberties (introduced in §36), as well as large disparities of income that violate the difference principle. While some effort is made to secure fair equality of opportunity, it is either insufficient or else ineffective given the disparities of wealth and the political influence they permit.

By contrast, in a property-owning democracy the aim is to carry out the idea of society as a fair system of cooperation over time among citizens as free and equal persons. Thus, basic institutions must from the outset put in the hands of citizens generally, and not only of a few, the productive means to be fully cooperating members of a society. The emphasis falls on the steady dispersal over time of the ownership of capital and resources by the laws of inheritance and bequest, on fair equality of opportunity secured by provisions for education and training, and the like, as well as on institutions that support the fair value of the political liberties. To see the full force of the difference principle it should be taken in the context of property-owning democracy (or of a liberal socialist regime) and not a welfare state: it is a principle of reciprocity, or mutuality, for society seen as a fair system of cooperation among free and equal citizens from one generation to the next.

The mention (a few lines back) of a liberal socialist regime prompts me to add that justice as fairness leaves open the question whether its principles are best realized by some form of property-owning democracy or by a liberal socialist regime. This question is left to be settled by historical conditions and the traditions, institutions, and social forces of each country. As a political conception, then, justice, as fairness includes no natural right of private property in the means of production (although it does include a right to personal property as necessary for citizens' independence and integrity), nor a natural right to worker-owned and -managed firms. It offers instead a conception of justice in the light of which, given the particular circumstances of a country, those questions can be reasonably decided.

John Rawls November 1990

7. See the last two paragraphs of §42, Chapter V.
