---
images: []
order: 22
title: 44. THE PROBLEM OF JUSTICE BETWEEN GENERATIONS44. Justice between Generations
---

We must now consider the question of justice between generations. There is no need to stress the difficulties that this problem raises. It subjects any ethical theory to severe if not impossible tests. Nevertheless, the account of justice as fairness would be incomplete without some discussion of this important matter. The problem arises in the present context because the question is still open whether the social system as a whole, the competitive economy surrounded by the appropriate family of background institutions, can be made to satisfy the two principles of justice. The answer is bound to depend, to some degree anyway, on the level at which the social minimum is to be set. But this in turn connects up with how far the present generation is bound to respect the claims of its successors.

So far I have said nothing about how generous the social minimum should be. Common sense might be content to say that the right level depends upon the average wealth of the country and that, other things equal, the minimum should be higher when the average increases. Or one might say that the proper level is determined by customary expectations. But these suggestions are unsatisfactory. The first is not precise enough since it does not say how the minimum depends on average wealth and it overlooks other relevant aspects such as distribution; while the second provides no criterion for telling when customary expectations are themselves reasonable. Once the difference principle is accepted, however, it follows that the minimum is to be set at that point which, taking wages into account, maximizes the expectations of the least advantaged group. By adjusting the amount of transfers (for example, the size of supplementary income payments), it is possible to increase or decrease the prospects of the more disadvantaged, their index of primary goods (as measured by wages plus transfers), so as to achieve the desired result.

Now offhand it might seem that the difference principle requires a very high minimum. One naturally imagines that the greater wealth of those better off is to be scaled down until eventually everyone has nearly the same income. But this is a misconception, although it might hold in special circumstances. The appropriate expectation in applying the difference principle is that of the long-term prospects of the least favored extending over future generations. Each generation must not only preserve the gains of culture and civilization, and maintain intact those just institutions that have been established, but it must also put aside in each period of time a suitable amount of real capital accumulation. This saving may take various forms from net investment in machinery and other means of production to investment in learning and education. Assuming for the moment that a just savings principle is available which tells us how great investment should be, the level of the social minimum is determined. Suppose for simplicity that the minimum is adjusted by transfers paid for by proportional expenditure (or income) taxes. In this case raising the minimum entails increasing the proportion by which consumption (or income) is taxed. Presumably as this fraction becomes larger there comes a point beyond which one of two things happens. Either the appropriate savings cannot be made or the greater taxes interfere so much with economic efficiency that the prospects of the least advantaged in the present generation are no longer improved but begin to decline. In either event the correct minimum has been reached. The difference principle is satisfied and no further increase is called for.

These comments about how to specify the social minimum have led us to the problem of justice between generations. Finding a just savings principle is one aspect of this question.20 Now I believe that it is not

<sup>20.</sup> This problem is often discussed by economists in the context of the theory of economic growth. For an exposition see A. K. Sen, "On Optimizing the Rate of Saving," *Economic Journal,* vol. 71 (1961); James Tobin, *National Economic Policy* (New Haven, Yale University Press, 1966), ch. IX; and R. M. Solow, *Growth Theory* (New York, Oxford University Press, 1970), ch. V. In an extensive

possible, at present anyway, to define precise limits on what the rate of savings should be. How the burden of capital accumulation and of raising the standard of civilization and culture is to be shared between generations seems to admit of no definite answer. It does not follow, however, that certain significant ethical constraints cannot be formulated. As I have said, a moral theory characterizes a point of view from which policies are to be assessed; and it may often be clear that a suggested answer is mistaken even if an alternative doctrine is not ready to hand. Thus it seems evident, for example, that the classical principle of utility leads in the wrong direction for questions of justice between generations. For if one takes the size of the population as variable, and postulates a high marginal productivity of capital and a very distant time horizon, maximizing total utility may lead to an excessive rate of accumulation (at least in the near future). Since from a moral point of view there are no grounds for discounting future well-being on the basis of pure time preference, the conclusion is all the more likely that the greater advantages of future generations will be sufficiently large to outweigh most any present sacrifices. This may prove true if only because with more capital and better technology it will be possible to support a sufficiently large population. Thus the utilitarian doctrine may direct us to demand heavy sacrifices of the poorer generations for the sake of greater advantages for later ones that are far better off. But this calculus of advantages, which balances the losses of some against benefits to others, appears even less justified in the case of generations than among contemporaries. Even if we cannot define a precise just savings principle, we should be able to avoid this sort of extreme.

Now the contract doctrine looks at the problem from the standpoint of the original position and requires the parties to adopt an appropriate savings principle. It seems clear that as they stand the two principles of justice must be adjusted to this question. For when the difference principle is applied to the question of saving over generations, it entails either

literature, see F. P. Ramsey, "A Mathematical Theory of Saving," *Economic Journal,* vol. 38 (1928), reprinted in Arrow and Scitovsky, *Readings in Welfare Economics;* T. C. Koopmans, "On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth" (1965) in *Scientific Papers of T. C. Koopmans* (Berlin, Springer Verlag, 1970). Sukamoy Chakravarty, *Capital and Development Planning* (Cambridge, M.I.T. Press, 1969), is a theoretical survey which touches upon the normative questions. If for theoretical purposes one thinks of the ideal society as one whose economy is in a steady state of growth (possibly zero), and which is at the same time just, then the savings problem is to choose a principle for sharing the burdens of getting to that growth path (or to such a path if there is more than one), and of maintaining the justice of the necessary arrangements once this is achieved. In the text, however, I do not pursue this suggestion; my discussion is at a more primitive level.

no saving at all or not enough saving to improve social circumstances sufficiently so that all the equal liberties can be effectively exercised. In following a just savings principle, each generation makes a contribution to those coming later and receives from its predecessors. There is no way for later generations to help the situation of the least fortunate earlier generation. Thus the difference principle does not hold for the question of justice between generations and the problem of saving must be treated in some other manner.

Some have thought the different fortunes of generations to be unjust. Herzen remarks that human development is a kind of chronological unfairness, since those who live later profit from the labor of their predecessors without paying the same price. And Kant thought it disconcerting that earlier generations should carry their burdens only for the sake of the later ones and that only the last should have the good fortune to dwell in the completed building.21 These feelings while entirely natural are misplaced. For although the relation between generations is a special one, it gives rise to no insuperable difficulty.

It is a natural fact that generations are spread out in time and actual economic benefits flow only in one direction. This situation is unalterable, and so the question of justice does not arise. What is just or unjust is how institutions deal with natural limitations and the way they are set up to take advantage of historical possibilities. Obviously if all generations are to gain (except perhaps the earlier ones), the parties must agree to a savings principle that insures that each generation receives its due from its predecessors and does its fair share for those to come. The only economic exchanges between generations are, so to speak, virtual ones, that is, compensating adjustments that can be made in the original position when a just savings principle is adopted.

Now when the parties consider this problem they do not know to which generation they belong or, what comes to the same thing, the stage of civilization of their society. They have no way of telling whether it is poor or relatively wealthy, largely agricultural or already industrialized, and so on. The veil of ignorance is complete in these respects. But since we take the present time of entry interpretation of the original position (§24), the parties know that they are contemporaries; and so unless we modify our initial assumptions, there is no reason for them to agree to any saving

<sup>21.</sup> The remark of Alexander Herzen is from Isaiah Berlin's introduction to Franco Venturi, *Roots of Revolution* (New York, Alfred Knopf, 1960), p. xx. For Kant, see "Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Purpose," in *Political Writings,* ed. Hans Reiss and trans. H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge, The University Press, 1970), p. 44.

whatever. Earlier generations will have either saved or not; there is nothing the parties can do to affect that. So to achieve a reasonable result, we assume first, that the parties represent family lines, say, who care at least about their more immediate descendants; and second, that the principle adopted must be such that they wish all earlier generations to have followed it (§22). These constraints, together with the veil of ignorance, are to insure that any one generation looks out for all.

In arriving at a just saving principle (or better, limits on such principles), the parties are to ask themselves how much they would be willing to save at each stage of advance on the assumption that all other generations have saved, or will save, in accordance with the same criterion. They are to consider their willingness to save at any given phase of civilization with the understanding that the rates they propose are to regulate the whole span of accumulation. It is essential to note that a savings principle is a rule that assigns an appropriate rate (or range of rates) to each level of advance, that is, a rule that determines a schedule of rates. Presumably different rates are assigned to different stages. When people are poor and saving is difficult, a lower rate of saving should be required; whereas in a wealthier society greater savings may reasonably be expected since the real burden of saving is less. Eventually, once just institutions are firmly established and all the basic liberties effectively realized, the net accumulation asked for falls to zero. At this point a society meets its duty of justice by maintaining just institutions and preserving their material base. The just savings principle applies to what a society is to save as a matter of justice. If its members wish to save for other purposes, that is another matter.

It is impossible to be very specific about the schedule of rates (or the range of rates) that would be acknowledged; the most that we can hope from these intuitive considerations is that certain extremes will be excluded. Thus we may assume that the parties avoid imposing very high rates at the earlier stages of accumulation, for even though they would benefit from this if they come later, they must be able to accept these rates in good faith should their society turn out to be poor. The strains of commitment apply here just as before (§29). On the other hand, they will want all generations to provide some saving (excluding special circumstances), since it is to our advantage if our predecessors have done their share. These observations establish wide limits for the savings rule. To narrow the range somewhat further, we suppose the parties to ask what is reasonable for members of adjacent generations to expect of one another at each level of advance. They try to piece together a just savings schedule by balancing how much they would be willing to save for their more immediate descendants against what they would feel entitled to claim of their more immediate predecessors. Thus imagining themselves to be fathers, say, they are to ascertain how much they should set aside for their sons and grandsons by noting what they would believe themselves entitled to claim of their fathers and grandfathers. When they arrive at the estimate that seems fair from both sides, with due allowance made for the improvement in circumstances, then the fair rate (or range of rates) for that stage is specified. Once this is done for all stages, the just savings principle is defined. Of course, the parties must throughout keep in mind the objective of the accumulation process, namely, a state of society with a material base sufficient to establish effective just institutions within which the basic liberties can all be realized. Assuming that the savings principle answers to these conditions, no generation can find fault with any other when it is followed, no matter how far removed they are in time.

The question of time preference and matters of priority I shall leave aside until the next sections. For the present I wish to point out several features of the contract approach. First of all, while it is evident that a just savings principle cannot literally be adopted democratically, the conception of the original position achieves the same result. Since no one knows to which generation he belongs, the question is viewed from the standpoint of each and a fair accommodation is expressed by the principle adopted. All generations are virtually represented in the original position, since the same principle would always be chosen. An ideally democratic decision will result, one that is fairly adjusted to the claims of each generation and therefore satisfying the precept that what touches all concerns all. Moreover, it is immediately obvious that every generation, except possibly the first, gains when a reasonable rate of saving is maintained. The process of accumulation, once it is begun and carried through, is to the good of all subsequent generations. Each passes on to the next a fair equivalent in real capital as defined by a just savings principle. (It should be kept in mind here that capital is not only factories and machines, and so on, but also the knowledge and culture, as well as the techniques and skills, that make possible just institutions and the fair value of liberty.) This equivalent is in return for what is received from previous generations that enables the later ones to enjoy a better life in a more just society.

It is also characteristic of the contract doctrine to define a just society as the aim of the course of accumulation. This feature derives from the fact that an ideal conception of a just basic structure is embedded in the principles chosen in the original position. In this respect, justice as fairness contrasts with utilitarian views (§41). The just savings principle can be regarded as an understanding between generations to carry their fair share of the burden of realizing and preserving a just society. The end of the savings process is set up in advance, although only the general outlines can be discerned. Particular circumstances as they arise will in time determine the more detailed aspects. But in any event we are not bound to go on maximizing indefinitely. Indeed, it is for this reason that the savings principle is agreed to after the principles of justice for institutions, even though this principle constrains the difference principle. These principles tell us what to strive for. The savings principle represents an interpretation, arrived at in the original position, of the previously accepted natural duty to uphold and to further just institutions. In this case the ethical problem is that of agreeing on a path over time which treats all generations justly during the whole course of a society's history. What seems fair to persons in the original position defines justice in this instance as in others.

The significance of the last stage of society should not, however, be misinterpreted. While all generations are to do their part in reaching the just state of things beyond which no further net saving is required, this state is not to be thought of as that alone which gives meaning and purpose to the whole process. To the contrary, all generations have their appropriate aims. They are not subordinate to one another any more than individuals are and no generation has stronger claims than any other. The life of a people is conceived as a scheme of cooperation spread out in historical time. It is to be governed by the same conception of justice that regulates the cooperation of contemporaries.

Finally, the last stage at which saving is called for is not one of great abundance. This consideration deserves perhaps some emphasis. Further wealth might not be superfluous for some purposes; and indeed average income may not, in absolute terms, be very high. Justice does not require that early generations save so that later ones are simply more wealthy. Saving is demanded as a condition of bringing about the full realization of just institutions and the equal liberties. If additional accumulation is to be undertaken, it is for other reasons. It is a mistake to believe that a just and good society must wait upon a high material standard of life. What men want is meaningful work in free association with others, these associations regulating their relations to one another within a framework of just basic institutions. To achieve this state of things great wealth is not necessary. In fact, beyond some point it is more likely to be a positive hindrance, a meaningless distraction at best if not a temptation to indulgence and emptiness. (Of course, the definition of meaningful work is a problem in itself. Though it is not a problem of justice, a few remarks in §79 are addressed to it.)

We now have to combine the just savings principle with the two principles of justice. This is done by supposing that this principle is defined from the standpoint of the least advantaged in each generation. It is the representative men from this group as it extends over time who by virtual adjustments are to specify the rate of accumulation. They undertake in effect to constrain the application of the difference principle. In any generation their expectations are to be maximized subject to the condition of putting aside the savings that would be acknowledged. Thus the complete statement of the difference principle includes the savings principle as a constraint. Whereas the first principle of justice and the principle of fair opportunity are prior to the difference principle within generations, the savings principle limits its scope between them.

Of course, the saving of the less favored need not be done by their taking an active part in the investment process. Rather it normally consists of their approving of the economic and other arrangements necessary for the appropriate accumulation. Saving is achieved by accepting as a political judgment those policies designed to improve the standard of life of later generations of the least advantaged, thereby abstaining from the immediate gains which are available. By supporting these arrangements the required saving can be made, and no representative man in any generation of the most disadvantaged can complain of another for not doing his part.

So much, then, for a brief sketch of some of the main features of the just savings principle. We can now see that persons in different generations have duties and obligations to one another just as contemporaries do. The present generation cannot do as it pleases but is bound by the principles that would be chosen in the original position to define justice between persons at different moments of time. In addition, men have a natural duty to uphold and to further just institutions and for this the improvement of civilization up to a certain level is required. The derivation of these duties and obligations may seem at first a somewhat farfetched application of the contract doctrine. Nevertheless these requirements would be acknowledged in the original position, and so the conception of justice as fairness covers these matters without any change in its basic idea.

#### 45. TIME PREFERENCE

I have assumed that in choosing a principle of savings the persons in the original position have no pure time preference. We need to consider the reasons for this presumption. In the case of an individual the avoidance of pure time preference is a feature of being rational. As Sidgwick maintains, rationality implies an impartial concern for all parts of our life. The mere difference of location in time, of something's being earlier or later, is not in itself a rational ground for having more or less regard for it. Of course, a present or near future advantage may be counted more heavily on account of its greater certainty or probability, and we should take into consideration how our situation and capacity for particular enjoyments will change. But none of these things justifies our preferring a lesser present to a greater future good simply because of its nearer temporal position22 (§64).

Now Sidgwick thought that the notions of universal good and individual good are in essential respects similar. He held that just as the good of one person is constructed by comparison and integration of the different goods of each moment as they follow one another in time, so the universal good is constructed by the comparison and integration of the good of many different individuals. The relations of the parts to the whole and to each other are analogous in each case, being founded on the aggregative principle of utility.23 The just savings principle for society must not, then, be affected by pure time preference, since as before the different temporal position of persons and generations does not in itself justify treating them differently.

Since in justice as fairness the principles of justice are not extensions of the principles of rational choice for one person, the argument against time preference must be of another kind. The question is settled by reference to the original position; but once it is seen from this perspective, we reach the same conclusion. There is no reason for the parties to give any weight to mere position in time. They have to choose a rate of saving for each level of civilization. If they make a distinction between earlier and more remote periods because, say, future states of affairs seem less important now, the present state of affairs will seem less important in the future. Although any decision has to be made now, there is no ground for their using today's discount of the future rather than the future's

<sup>22.</sup> See *The Methods of Ethics,* 7th ed. (London, Macmillan, 1907), p. 381. Time preference is also rejected by Ramsey, "A Mathematical Theory of Saving."

<sup>23.</sup> *Methods of Ethics,* p. 382. See also §30, note 37.

discount of today. The situation is symmetrical and one choice is as arbitrary as the other.24 Since the persons in the original position take up the standpoint of each period, being subject to the veil of ignorance, this symmetry is clear to them and they will not consent to a principle that weighs nearer periods more or less heavily. Only in this way can they arrive at a consistent agreement from all points of view, for to acknowledge a principle of time preference is to authorize persons differently situated temporally to assess one another's claims by different weights based solely on this contingency.

As with rational prudence, the rejection of pure time preference is not incompatible with taking uncertainties and changing circumstances into account; nor does it rule out using an interest rate (in either a socialist or a private-property economy) to ration limited funds for investment. The restriction is rather that in first principles of justice we are not allowed to treat generations differently solely on the grounds that they are earlier or later in time. The original position is so defined that it leads to the correct principle in this respect. In the case of the individual, pure time preference is irrational: it means that he is not viewing all moments as equally parts of one life. In the case of society, pure time preference is unjust: it means (in the more common instance when the future is discounted) that the living take advantage of their position in time to favor their own interests.

The contract view agrees, then, with Sidgwick in rejecting time preference as a grounds of social choice. The living may, if they allow themselves to be moved by such considerations, wrong their predecessors and descendants. Now this contention may seem contrary to democratic principles, for it is sometimes said that these require that the wishes of the present generation should determine social policy. Of course, it is assumed that these preferences need to be clarified and ascertained under the appropriate conditions. Collective saving for the future has many aspects of a public good, and the isolation and assurance problems arise in this case.25 But supposing that these difficulties are overcome and that the informed collective judgment of the present generation is known under the requisite conditions, it may be thought that a democratic view of the state does not countenance the government's intervening for the sake of future generations even when the public judgment is manifestly mistaken.

<sup>24.</sup> See Sen, "On Optimizing the Rate of Savings," p. 482.

<sup>25.</sup> See Sen, ibid., p. 479; and S. A. Marglin, "The Social Rate of Discount and the Optimal Rate of Investment," *Quarterly Journal of Economics,* vol. 77 (1963), pp. 100–109.

Whether this contention is correct depends upon how it is interpreted. There can be no objection to it as a description of a democratic constitution. Once the public will is clearly expressed in legislation and social policies, the government cannot override it without ceasing to be democratic. It is not authorized to nullify the views of the electorate as to how much saving is to be undertaken. If a democratic regime is justified, then the government's having this power would normally lead to a greater injustice on balance. We are to decide between constitutional arrangements according to how likely it is that they will yield just and effective legislation. A democrat is one who believes that a democratic constitution best meets this criterion. But his conception of justice includes a provision for the just claims of future generations. Even if as a practical matter in the choice of regimes the electorate should have the final say, this is only because it is more likely to be correct than a government empowered to override its wishes. Since, however, a just constitution even under favorable conditions is a case of imperfect procedural justice, the people may still decide wrongly. By causing irreversible damages say, they may perpetuate grave offenses against other generations which under another form of government might have been prevented. Moreover, the injustice may be perfectly evident and demonstrable as such by the same conception of justice that underlies the democratic regime itself. Several of the principles of this conception may actually be more or less explicit in the constitution and frequently cited by the judiciary and informed opinion in interpreting it.

In these cases, then, there is no reason why a democrat may not oppose the public will by suitable forms of noncompliance, or even as a government official try to circumvent it. Although one believes in the soundness of a democratic constitution and accepts the duty to support it, the duty to comply with particular laws may be overridden in situations where the collective judgment is sufficiently unjust. There is nothing sacrosanct about the public decision concerning the level of savings; and its bias with respect to time preference deserves no special respect. In fact the absence of the injured parties, the future generations, makes it all the more open to question. One does not cease to be a democrat unless one thinks that some other form of government would be better and one's efforts are directed to this end. As long as one does not believe this, but thinks instead that appropriate forms of noncompliance, for example, acts of civil disobedience or conscientious refusal, are both necessary and reasonable ways to correct democratically enacted policies, then one's conduct is consistent with accepting a democratic constitution. In the next chapter I shall discuss this matter in more detail. For the moment the essential point is that the collective will concerning the provision for the future is subject, as all other social decisions are, to the principles of justice. The peculiar features of this case do not make it an exception.

We should observe that to reject pure time preference as a first principle is compatible with recognizing that a certain discounting of the future may improve otherwise defective criteria. For example, I have already remarked that the utilitarian principle may lead to an extremely high rate of saving which imposes excessive hardships on earlier generations. This consequence can be to some degree corrected by discounting the welfare of those living in the future. Since the well-being of later generations is made to count for less, not so much need be saved as before. It is also possible to vary the accumulation required by adjusting the parameters in the postulated utility function. I cannot discuss these questions here.26 Unhappily I can only express the opinion that these devices simply mitigate the consequences of mistaken principles. The situation is in some respects similar to that found with the intuitionistic conception which combines the standard of utility with a principle of equality (see §7). There the criterion of equality suitably weighted serves to correct the utility criterion when neither principle taken alone would prove acceptable. Thus in an analogous way, having started with the idea that the appropriate rate of saving is the one which maximizes social utility over time (maximizes some integral), we may obtain a more plausible result if the welfare of future generations is weighted less heavily; and the most suitable discount may depend upon how swiftly population is growing, upon the productivity of capital, and so on. What we are doing is adjusting certain parameters so as to reach a conclusion more in line with our intuitive judgments. We may find that to achieve justice between generations, these modifications in the principle of utility are required. Certainly introducing time preference may be an improvement in such cases; but I believe that its being invoked in this way is an indication that we have started from an incorrect conception. There is a difference between the situation here and the previously mentioned intuitionistic view. Unlike the principle of equality, time preference has no intrinsic ethical appeal. It is introduced in a purely ad hoc way to moderate the consequences of the utility criterion.

26. See Chakravarty, *Capital and Development Planning,* pp. 39f, 47, 63–65, 249f. Solow, *Growth Theory,* pp. 79–87, gives an account of the mathematical problem.

#### 46. FURTHER CASES OF PRIORITY

The problem of just savings may be used to illustrate further cases of the priority of justice. One feature of the contract doctrine is that it places an upper bound on how much a generation can be asked to save for the welfare of later generations. The just savings principle acts as a constraint on the rate of accumulation. Each age is to do its fair share in achieving the conditions necessary for just institutions and the fair value of liberty; but beyond this more cannot be required. Now it may be objected that particularly when the sum of advantages is very great and represents long-term developments, higher rates of saving may be demanded. Some may go further and maintain that inequalities in wealth and authority violating the second principle of justice may be justified if the subsequent economic and social benefits are large enough. To support their view they may point to instances in which we seem to accept such inequalities and rates of accumulation for the sake of the welfare of later generations. Keynes remarks, for example, that the immense accumulations of capital built up before the First World War could never have come about in a society in which wealth was equally divided.27 Society in the nineteenth century, he says, was arranged so as to place the increased income in the hands of those least likely to consume it. The new rich were not brought up to large expenditures and preferred to the enjoyments of immediate consumption the power which investment gave. It was precisely the inequality of the distribution of wealth which made possible the rapid build-up of capital and the more or less steady improvement in the general standard of living of everyone. It is this fact, in Keynes's opinion, that provided the main justification of the capitalist system. If the rich had spent their new wealth on themselves, such a regime would have been rejected as intolerable. Certainly there are more efficient and just ways of raising the level of well-being and culture than that Keynes describes. It is only in special circumstances, including the frugality of the capitalist class as opposed to the self-indulgence of the aristocracy, that a society should obtain investment funds by endowing the rich with more than they feel they can decently spend on themselves. But the essential point here is that Keynes's justification, whether or not its premises are sound, can be made to turn solely on improving the situation of the working class. Although their circumstances appear harsh, Keynes presumably main-

<sup>27.</sup> See J. M. Keynes, *The Economic Consequences of the Peace* (London, Macmillan, 1919), pp. 18–22.

tains that while there were many ostensible injustices in the system, there was no real possibility that these could have been removed and the conditions of the less advantaged made better. Under other arrangements the position of the laboring man would have been even worse. We need not consider whether these contentions are true. It suffices to note that, contrary to what one might have thought, Keynes does not say that the hardships of the poor are justified by the greater welfare of later generations. And this accords with the priority of justice over efficiency and a greater sum of advantages. Whenever the constraints of justice in the matter of savings are infringed, it must be shown that circumstances are such that not to trespass upon them would lead to an even greater injury to those on whom the injustice falls. This case is analogous to those already discussed under the heading of the priority of liberty (see §39).

It is clear that the inequalities that Keynes had in mind also violate the principle of fair equality of opportunity. Thus we are led to consider what must be argued to excuse the infringement of this criterion and how to formulate the appropriate priority rule.28 Many writers hold that fair equality of opportunity would have grave consequences. They believe that some sort of hierarchical social structure and a governing class with pervasive hereditary features are essential for the public good. Political power should be exercised by men experienced in, and educated from childhood to assume, the constitutional traditions of their society, men whose ambitions are moderated by the privileges and amenities of their assured position. Otherwise the stakes become too high and those lacking in culture and conviction contend with one another to control the power of the state for their narrow ends. Thus Burke believed that the great families of the ruling stratum contribute by the wisdom of their political rule to the general welfare from generation to generation.29 And Hegel thought that restrictions on equality of opportunity such as primogeniture are essential to insure a landed class especially suited to political rule in virtue of its independence from the state, the quest for profit, and the manifold contingencies of civil society.30 Privileged family and property arrangements prepare those favored by them to take a clearer view of the universal interest for the benefit of the whole society. Of course, one need not favor anything like a rigidly stratified system; one may maintain to

<sup>28.</sup> In this and the next several paragraphs, I am indebted to Michael Lessnoff. See his essay in *Political Studies,* vol. 19 (1971), pp. 75f. The statement and discussion of the priority rules here and in §39 have benefited from his criticisms.

<sup>29.</sup> See *Reflections on the Revolution in France* (London, J.M. Dent and Sons, 1910), p. 49; and John Plamenatz, *Man and Society* (London, Longmans, Green, 1963), vol. 1, pp. 346–351.

<sup>30.</sup> *Philosophy of Right,* §306, trans. T. M. Knox (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1942), p. 199.

the contrary that it is essential for the vigor of the governing class that persons of unusual talents should be able to make their way into it and be fully accepted. But this proviso is compatible with denying the principle of fair opportunity.

Now to be consistent with the priority of fair opportunity over the difference principle, it is not enough to argue, as Burke and Hegel appear to, that the whole of society including the least favored benefit from certain restrictions on equality of opportunity. We must also claim that the attempt to eliminate these inequalities would so interfere with the social system and the operations of the economy that in the long run anyway the opportunities of the disadvantaged would be even more limited. The priority of fair opportunity, as in the parallel case of the priority of liberty, means that we must appeal to the chances given to those with the lesser opportunity. We must hold that a wider range of more desirable alternatives is open to them than otherwise would be the case.

I shall not pursue these complications further. We should however note that although the internal life and culture of the family influence, perhaps as much as anything else, a child's motivation and his capacity to gain from education, and so in turn his life prospects, these effects are not necessarily inconsistent with fair equality of opportunity. Even in a wellordered society that satisfies the two principles of justice, the family may be a barrier to equal chances between individuals. For as I have defined it, the second principle only requires equal life prospects in all sectors of society for those similarly endowed and motivated. If there are variations among families in the same sector in how they shape the child's aspirations, then while fair equality of opportunity may obtain between sectors, equal chances between individuals will not. This possibility raises the question as to how far the notion of equality of opportunity can be carried; but I defer comment on this until later (§77). I shall only remark here that following the difference principle and the priority rules it suggests reduces the urgency to achieve perfect equality of opportunity.

I shall not examine whether there are sound arguments overriding the principle of fair equality of opportunity in favor of a hierarchical class structure. These matters are not part of the theory of justice. The relevant point is that while such contentions may sometimes appear self-serving and hypocritical, they have the right form when they claim (whether correctly or not) that the opportunities of the least favored sectors of the community would be still more limited if these inequalities were removed. One is to hold that they are not unjust, since the conditions for achieving the full realization of the principles of justice do not exist.

Having noted these cases of priority, I now wish to give the final statement of the two principles of justice for institutions. For the sake of completeness, I shall give a full statement including earlier formulations.

#### FIRST PRINCIPLE

Each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive total system of equal basic liberties compatible with a similar system of liberty for all.

#### SECOND PRINCIPLE

Social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are both:

- (a) to the greatest benefit of the least advantaged, consistent with the just savings principle, and
- (b) attached to offices and positions open to all under conditions of fair equality of opportunity.

#### FIRST PRIORITY RULE (THE PRIORITY OF LIBERTY)

The principles of justice are to be ranked in lexical order and therefore the basic liberties can be restricted only for the sake of liberty. There are two cases:

- (a) a less extensive liberty must strengthen the total system of liberties shared by all;
- (b) a less than equal liberty must be acceptable to those with the lesser liberty.

#### SECOND PRIORITY RULE (THE PRIORITY OF JUSTICE OVER EFFICIENCY AND WELFARE)

The second principle of justice is lexically prior to the principle of efficiency and to that of maximizing the sum of advantages; and fair opportunity is prior to the difference principle. There are two cases:

(a) an inequality of opportunity must enhance the opportunities of those with the lesser opportunity;

(b) an excessive rate of saving must on balance mitigate the burden of those bearing this hardship.

By way of comment, these principles and priority rules are no doubt incomplete. Other modifications will surely have to be made, but I shall not further complicate the statement of the principles. It suffices to observe that when we come to nonideal theory, the lexical ordering of the two principles, and the valuations that this ordering implies, suggest priority rules which seem to be reasonable enough in many cases. By various examples I have tried to illustrate how these rules can be used and to indicate their plausibility. Thus the ranking of the principles of justice in ideal theory reflects back and guides the application of these principles to nonideal situations. It identifies which limitations need to be dealt with first. In the more extreme and tangled instances of nonideal theory this priority of rules will no doubt fail; and indeed, we may be able to find no satisfactory answer at all. But we must try to postpone the day of reckoning as long as possible, and try to arrange society so that it never comes.

#### 47. THE PRECEPTS OF JUSTICE

The sketch of the system of institutions that satisfies the two principles of justice is now complete. Once the just rate of savings is ascertained or the appropriate range of rates specified, we have a criterion for adjusting the level of the social minimum. The sum of transfers and benefits from essential public goods should be arranged so as to enhance the expectations of the least favored consistent with the required savings and the maintenance of equal liberties. When the basic structure takes this form the distribution that results will be just (or at least not unjust) whatever it is. Each receives that total income (earnings plus transfers) to which he is entitled under the public system of rules upon which his legitimate expectations are founded.

Now, as we saw earlier (§14), a central feature of this conception of distributive justice is that it contains a large element of pure procedural justice. No attempt is made to define the just distribution of goods and services on the basis of information about the preferences and claims of particular individuals. This sort of knowledge is regarded as irrelevant from a suitably general point of view; and in any case, it introduces complexities that cannot be handled by principles of tolerable simplicity to which men might reasonably be expected to agree. But if the notion of pure procedural justice is to succeed, it is necessary, as I have said, to set up and to administer impartially a just system of surrounding institutions. The reliance on pure procedural justice presupposes that the basic structure satisfies the two principles.

This account of distributive shares is simply an elaboration of the familiar idea that income and wages will be just once a (workably) competitive price system is properly organized and embedded in a just basic structure. These conditions are sufficient. The distribution that results is a case of background justice on the analogy with the outcome of a fair game. But we need to consider whether this conception fits our intuitive ideas of what is just and unjust. In particular we must ask how well it accords with common sense precepts of justice. It seems as if we have ignored these notions altogether. I now wish to show that they can be accounted for and their subordinate place explained.

The problem may be stated in the following way. Mill argued correctly that so long as one remains at the level of common sense precepts, no reconciliation of these maxims of justice is possible. For example, in the case of wages, the precepts to each according to his effort and to each according to his contribution are contrary injunctions taken by themselves. Moreover, if we wish to assign them certain weights, they provide no way to determine how their relative merits are to be ascertained. Thus common sense precepts do not express a determinate theory of just or fair wages.<sup>31</sup> It does not follow, though, as Mill seems to suppose, that one can find a satisfactory conception only by adopting the utilitarian principle. Some higher principle is indeed necessary; but there are other alternatives than that of utility. It is even possible to elevate one of these precepts, or some combination of them, to the level of a first principle, as when it is said: to each according to his needs.<sup>32</sup> From the standpoint of the theory of justice, the two principles of justice define the correct higher criterion. Therefore the problem is to consider whether the common sense precepts of justice would arise in a well-ordered society and how they would receive their appropriate weights.

Consider the case of wages in a perfectly competitive economy surrounded by a just basic structure. Assume that each firm (whether pub-

<sup>31.</sup> Utilitarianism, ch. V, par. 30.

<sup>32.</sup> This precept is cited by Marx in his *Critique of the Gotha Program*, in *Karl Marx and Frederick Engels*, *Selected Works* (Moscow, Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1955), vol. II, p. 24.

licly or privately owned) must adjust its rates of pay to the long-run forces of supply and demand. The rates firms pay cannot be so high that they cannot afford paying those rates or so low that a sufficient number will not offer their skills in view of the other opportunities available. In equilibrium the relative attractiveness of different jobs will be equal, all things considered. It is easy, then, to see how the various precepts of justice arise. They simply identify features of jobs that are significant on either the demand or the supply side of the market, or both. A firm's demand for workers is determined by the marginal productivity of labor, that is, by the net value of the contribution of a unit of labor measured by the sale price of the commodities that it produces. The worth of this contribution to the firm rests eventually on market conditions, on what households are willing to pay for various goods. Experience and training, natural ability and special know-how, tend to earn a premium. Firms are willing to pay more to those with these characteristics because their productivity is greater. This fact explains and gives weight to the precept to each according to his contribution, and as special cases, we have the norms to each according to his training, or his experience, and the like. But also, viewed from the supply side, a premium must be paid if those who may later offer their services are to be persuaded to undertake the costs of training and postponement. Similarly jobs which involve uncertain or unstable employment, or which are performed under hazardous and unpleasantly strenuous conditions, tend to receive more pay. Otherwise men cannot be found to fill them. From this circumstance arise such precepts as to each according to his effort, or the risks he bears, and so on. Even when individuals are assumed to be of the same natural ability, these norms will still arise from the requirements of economic activity. Given the aims of productive units and of those seeking work, certain characteristics are singled out as relevant. At any time the wage practices of firms tend to recognize these precepts and, allowing time for adjustment, assign them the weights called for by market conditions.

All of this seems reasonably clear. More important are several further points. For one thing, different conceptions of justice are likely to generate much the same common sense precepts. Thus in a society regulated by the principle of utility all of the above norms would most likely be recognized. So long as the aims of economic agents are sufficiently similar, these precepts are bound to be appealed to, and wage practices will explicitly take them into account. On the other hand, the weights that are assigned to these precepts will not in general be the same. It is here that conceptions of justice diverge. Not only will there be a tendency to operate wage practices in other ways, but the long-term trend of economic events will almost certainly take another course. When the family of background institutions is governed by distinct conceptions, the market forces to which firms and workers have to adjust will not be the same. A different balance of supply and demand will see to it that the various precepts are balanced differently. Thus the contrast between conceptions of justice does not show up at the level of common sense norms but rather in the relative and changing emphasis that these norms receive over time. In no case can the customary or conventional notion of a fair or just balancing be taken as fundamental, since it will depend upon the principles regulating the background system and the adjustments which they require to current conditions.

An example may clarify this point. Suppose that the basic structure of one society provides for fair equality of opportunity while that of a second society does not. Then in the first society the precept to each according to his contribution in the particular form of each according to his training and education will probably receive much less weight. This is likely to be true even if we suppose, as the facts suggest, that persons have different natural abilities. The reason for this is that with many more persons receiving the benefits of training and education, the supply of qualified individuals in the first society is much greater. When there are no restrictions on entry or imperfections in the capital market for loans (or subsidies) for education, the premium earned by those better endowed is far less. The relative difference in earnings between the more favored and the lowest income class tends to close; and this tendency is even stronger when the difference principle is followed. Thus the precept to each according to his training and education is weighted less in the first than in the second society and the precept to each according to his effort is weighted more. Of course, a conception of justice requires that when social conditions change the appropriate balance of precepts normally changes as well. Over time the consistent application of its principles gradually reshapes the social structure so that market forces also shift, thereby resetting the weight of precepts. There is nothing sacrosanct about the existing balance even if it is correct.

Moreover, it is essential to keep in mind the subordinate place of common sense norms. Doing this is sometimes difficult because they are familiar from everyday life and therefore they are likely to have a prominence in our thinking that their derivative status does not justify. None of these precepts can be plausibly raised to a first principle. Each has presumably arisen in answer to a relevant feature connected with certain particular institutions, this feature being but one among many and these institutions of a special kind. Adopting one of them as a first principle is sure to lead to the neglect of other things that should be taken into account. And if all or many precepts are treated as first principles, there is no gain in systematic clarity. Common sense precepts are at the wrong level of generality. In order to find suitable first principles one must step behind them. Admittedly some precepts appear quite general at first. For example, the precept to each according to his contribution covers many cases of distribution in a perfectly competitive economy. Accepting the marginal productivity theory of distribution, each factor of production receives an income according to how much it adds to output (assuming private property in the means of production). In this sense, a worker is paid the full value of the results of his labor, no more and no less. Offhand this strikes us as fair. It appeals to a traditional idea of the natural right of property in the fruits of our labor. Therefore to some writers the precept of contribution has seemed satisfactory as a principle of justice.<sup>33</sup>

It is easy to see, however, that this is not the case. The marginal product of labor depends upon supply and demand. What an individual contributes by his work varies with the demand of firms for his skills, and this in turn varies with the demand for the products of firms. An individual's contribution is also affected by how many offer similar talents. There is no presumption, then, that following the precept of contribution leads to a just outcome unless the underlying market forces, and the availability of opportunities which they reflect, are appropriately regulated. And this implies, as we have seen, that the basic structure as a whole is just. There is no way, then, to give a proper weight to the precepts of justice except by instituting the surrounding arrangements required by the principles of justice. Some institutions may indeed give a special prominence to certain precepts, in the way for example that a competitive economy emphasizes the precept of contribution. But no inference about the justice of the final distribution can be drawn from viewing the use of any precept in isolation. The overall weighting of the many precepts is done by the whole system. Thus the precept of need is left to the transfer branch; it does not serve as a precept of wages at all. To assess the justice of distributive shares, we must note the total working of the background arrangements, the proportion of income and wealth deriving from each branch.34

<sup>33.</sup> J. B. Clark is often cited as an example. But see the discussion by J. M. Clark in *The Development of Economic Thought,* ed. H. W. Spiegel (New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1952), pp. 598–612. 34. Thus J. B. Clark's mistake in his reply to Marx is his failure to consider sufficiently the

It may be objected to the preceding account of the common sense precepts and to the idea of pure procedural justice that a perfectly competitive economy can never be realized. Factors of production never in fact receive their marginal products, and under modern conditions anyway industries soon come to be dominated by a few large firms. Competition is at best imperfect and persons receive less than the value of their contribution, and in this sense they are exploited.35 The reply to this is first that in any case the conception of a suitably regulated competitive economy with the appropriate background institutions is an ideal scheme which shows how the two principles of justice might be realized. It serves to illustrate the content of these principles, and brings out one way in which either a private-property economy or a socialist regime can satisfy this conception of justice. Granting that existing conditions always fall short of the ideal assumptions, we have some notion of what is just. Moreover we are in a better position to assess how serious the existing imperfections are and to decide upon the best way to approximate the ideal.

A second point is this. The sense in which persons are exploited by market imperfections is a highly special one: namely, the precept of contribution is violated, and this happens because the price system is no longer efficient. But as we have just seen, this precept is but one among many secondary norms, and what really counts is the workings of the whole system and whether these defects are compensated for elsewhere. Furthermore, since it is essentially the principle of efficiency that is not fulfilled, one might as well say that the whole community is exploited. But in fact the notion of exploitation is out of place here. It implies a deep injustice in the background system and has little to do with the inefficiencies of markets.36

Finally, in view of the subordinate place of the principle of efficiency in justice as fairness, the inevitable deviations from market perfection are not especially worrisome. It is more important that a competitive scheme gives scope for the principle of free association and individual choice of occupation against a background of fair equality of opportunity, and that it allows the decisions of households to regulate the items to be produced for private purposes. A basic prerequisite is the compatibility of economic

question of background justice. See J. M. Clark, ibid., pp. 610f. Marxian exploitation is compatible with perfect competition, since it is the outcome of a certain structure of property relations.

<sup>35.</sup> For this definition of exploitation, see A. C. Pigou, *The Economics of Welfare,* 4th ed. (London, Macmillan, 1932), pp. 549–551.

<sup>36.</sup> See Mark Blaug, *Economic Theory in Retrospect,* pp. 434f.

arrangements with the institutions of liberty and free association. Thus if markets are reasonably competitive and open, the notion of pure procedural justice is a feasible one to follow. It seems more practicable than other traditional ideals, being explicitly framed to coordinate the multitude of possible criteria into one coherent and workable conception.
