---
images: []
order: 23
title: 48. LEGITIMATE EXPECTATIONS AND MORAL DESERT48. Legitimate Expectations
---

There is a tendency for common sense to suppose that income and wealth, and the good things in life generally, should be distributed according to moral desert. Justice is happiness according to virtue. While it is recognized that this ideal can never be fully carried out, it is the appropriate conception of distributive justice, at least as a prima facie principle, and society should try to realize it as circumstances permit.37 Now justice as fairness rejects this conception. Such a principle would not be chosen in the original position. There seems to be no way of defining the requisite criterion in that situation. Moreover, the notion of distribution according to virtue fails to distinguish between moral desert and legitimate expectations. Thus it is true that as persons and groups take part in just arrangements, they acquire claims on one another defined by the publicly recognized rules. Having done various things encouraged by the existing arrangements, they now have certain rights, and just distributive shares honor these claims. A just scheme, then, answers to what men are entitled to; it satisfies their legitimate expectations as founded upon social institutions. But what they are entitled to is not proportional to nor dependent upon their intrinsic worth. The principles of justice that regulate the basic structure and specify the duties and obligations of individuals do not mention moral desert, and there is no tendency for distributive shares to correspond to it.

This contention is borne out by the preceding account of common sense precepts and their role in pure procedural justice (§47). For example, in determining wages a competitive economy gives weight to the precept of contribution. But as we have seen, the extent of one's contribu-

<sup>37.</sup> See, for example, W. D. Ross, *The Right and the Good* (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1930), pp. 21, 26–28, 35, 57f. Similarly, Leibniz in "On the Ultimate Origin of Things" (1697) speaks of the law of justice which "declares that each one [each individual] participate in the perfection of the universe and in a happiness of his own in proportion to his own virtue and to the good will he entertains toward the common good." *Leibniz,* ed. P. P. Wiener (New York, Charles Scribner's Sons, 1951), p. 353.

tion (estimated by one's marginal productivity) depends upon supply and demand. Surely a person's moral worth does not vary according to how many offer similar skills, or happen to want what he can produce. No one supposes that when someone's abilities are less in demand or have deteriorated (as in the case of singers) his moral deservingness undergoes a similar shift. All of this is perfectly obvious and has long been agreed to.38 It simply reflects the fact noted before (§17) that it is one of the fixed points of our moral judgments that no one deserves his place in the distribution of natural assets any more than he deserves his initial starting place in society.

Moreover, none of the precepts of justice aims at rewarding virtue. The premiums earned by scarce natural talents, for example, are to cover the costs of training and to encourage the efforts of learning, as well as to direct ability to where it best furthers the common interest. The distributive shares that result do not correlate with moral worth, since the initial endowment of natural assets and the contingencies of their growth and nurture in early life are arbitrary from a moral point of view. The precept which seems intuitively to come closest to rewarding moral desert is that of distribution according to effort, or perhaps better, conscientious effort.39 Once again, however, it seems clear that the effort a person is willing to make is influenced by his natural abilities and skills and the alternatives open to him. The better endowed are more likely, other things equal, to strive conscientiously, and there seems to be no way to discount for their greater good fortune. The idea of rewarding desert is impracticable. And certainly to the extent that the precept of need is emphasized, moral worth is ignored. Nor does the basic structure tend to balance the precepts of justice so as to achieve the requisite correspondence behind the scenes. It is regulated by the two principles of justice which define other aims entirely.

The same conclusion may be reached in another way. In the preceding remarks the notion of moral worth as distinct from a person's claims based upon his legitimate expectations has not been explained. Suppose, then, that we define this notion and show that it has no correlation with distributive shares. We have only to consider a well-ordered society, that is, a society in which institutions are just and this fact is publicly recognized. Its members also have a strong sense of justice, an effective desire to comply with the existing rules and to give one another that to which

<sup>38.</sup> See F. H. Knight, *The Ethics of Competition* (New York, Harper and Brothers, 1935), pp. 54– 57.

<sup>39.</sup> See Knight, ibid., p. 56n.

they are entitled. In this case we may assume that everyone is of equal moral worth. We have now defined this notion in terms of the sense of justice, the desire to act in accordance with the principles that would be chosen in the original position (§72). But it is evident that understood in this way, the equal moral worth of persons does not entail that distributive shares are equal. Each is to receive what the principles of justice say he is entitled to, and these do not require equality.

The essential point is that the concept of moral worth does not provide a first principle of distributive justice. This is because it cannot be introduced until after the principles of justice and of natural duty and obligation have been acknowledged. Once these principles are on hand, moral worth can be defined as having a sense of justice; and as I shall discuss later (§66), the virtues can be characterized as desires or tendencies to act upon the corresponding principles. Thus the concept of moral worth is secondary to those of right and justice, and it plays no role in the substantive definition of distributive shares. The case is analogous to the relation between the substantive rules of property and the law of robbery and theft. These offenses and the demerits they entail presuppose the institution of property which is established for prior and independent social ends. For a society to organize itself with the aim of rewarding moral desert as a first principle would be like having the institution of property in order to punish thieves. The criterion to each according to his virtue would not, then, be chosen in the original position. Since the parties desire to advance their conceptions of the good, they have no reason for arranging their institutions so that distributive shares are determined by moral desert, even if they could find an antecedent standard for its definition.

In a well-ordered society individuals acquire claims to a share of the social product by doing certain things encouraged by the existing arrangements. The legitimate expectations that arise are the other side, so to speak, of the principle of fairness and the natural duty of justice. For in the way that one has a duty to uphold just arrangements, and an obligation to do one's part when one has accepted a position in them, so a person who has complied with the scheme and done his share has a right to be treated accordingly by others. They are bound to meet his legitimate expectations. Thus when just economic arrangements exist, the claims of individuals are properly settled by reference to the rules and precepts (with their respective weights) which these practices take as relevant. As we have seen, it is incorrect to say that just distributive shares reward individuals according to their moral worth. But what we can say is that, in the traditional phrase, a just scheme gives each person his due: that is, it allots to each what he is entitled to as defined by the scheme itself. The principles of justice for institutions and individuals establish that doing this is fair.

Now it should be noted that even though a person's claims are regulated by the existing rules, we can still make a distinction between being entitled to something and deserving it in a familiar although nonmoral sense.<sup>40</sup> To illustrate, after a game one often says that the losing side deserved to win. Here one does not mean that the victors are not entitled to claim the championship, or whatever spoils go to the winner. One means instead that the losing team displayed to a higher degree the skills and qualities that the game calls forth, and the exercise of which gives the sport its appeal. Therefore the losers truly deserved to win but lost out as a result of bad luck, or from other contingencies that caused the contest to miscarry. Similarly even the best economic arrangements will not always lead to the more preferred outcomes. The claims that individuals actually acquire inevitably deviate more or less widely from those that the scheme is designed to allow for. Some persons in favored positions, for example, may not have to a higher degree than others the desired qualities and abilities. All this is evident enough. Its bearing here is that although we can indeed distinguish between the claims that existing arrangements require us to honor, given what individuals have done and how things have turned out, and the claims that would have resulted under more ideal circumstances, none of this implies that distributive shares should be in accordance with moral worth. Even when things happen in the best way, there is still no tendency for distribution and virtue to coincide.

No doubt some may still contend that distributive shares should match moral worth at least to the extent that this is feasible. They may believe that unless those who are better off have superior moral character, their having greater advantages is an affront to our sense of justice. Now this opinion may arise from thinking of distributive justice as somehow the opposite of retributive justice. It is true that in a reasonably well-ordered society those who are punished for violating just laws have normally done something wrong. This is because the purpose of the criminal law is to uphold basic natural duties, those which forbid us to injure other persons in their life and limb, or to deprive them of their liberty and property, and punishments are to serve this end. They are not simply a

<sup>40.</sup> Here I borrow from Joel Feinberg, *Doing and Deserving* (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1970), pp. 64f.

scheme of taxes and burdens designed to put a price on certain forms of conduct and in this way to guide men's conduct for mutual advantage. It would be far better if the acts proscribed by penal statutes were never done.41 Thus a propensity to commit such acts is a mark of bad character, and in a just society legal punishments will only fall upon those who display these faults.

It is clear that the distribution of economic and social advantages is entirely different. These arrangements are not the converse, so to speak, of the criminal law, so that just as the one punishes certain offenses, the other rewards moral worth.42 The function of unequal distributive shares is to cover the costs of training and education, to attract individuals to places and associations where they are most needed from a social point of view, and so on. Assuming that everyone accepts the propriety of self- or group-interested motivation duly regulated by a sense of justice, each decides to do those things that best accord with his aims. Variations in wages and income and the perquisites of position are simply to influence these choices so that the end result accords with efficiency and justice. In a well-ordered society there would be no need for the penal law except insofar as the assurance problem made it necessary. The question of criminal justice belongs for the most part to partial compliance theory, whereas the account of distributive shares belongs to strict compliance theory and so to the consideration of the ideal scheme. To think of distributive and retributive justice as converses of one another is completely misleading and suggests a different justification for distributive shares than the one they in fact have.

#### 49. COMPARISON WITH MIXED CONCEPTIONS

While I have often compared the principles of justice with utilitarianism, I have not yet said anything about the mixed conceptions. It will be recalled that these are defined by substituting the standard of utility and other criteria for the second principle of justice (§21). I must now consider these alternatives, especially since many persons may find them more reasonable than the principles of justice which seem at first anyway to impose rather stringent requirements. But it needs to be emphasized straightway that all the mixed conceptions accept the first principle, and

<sup>41.</sup> See H. L. A. Hart, *The Concept of Law* (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1961), p. 39; and Feinberg, *Doing and Deserving,* ch. V.

<sup>42.</sup> On this point, see Feinberg, ibid., pp. 62, 69n.

therefore recognize the primary place of the equal liberties. None of these views is utilitarian, for even if the principle of utility is substituted for the second principle, or for some part of it, say the difference principle, the conception of utility still has a subordinate place. Thus insofar as one of the chief aims of justice as fairness is to construct an alternative to the classical utilitarian doctrine, this aim is achieved even if we finally accept a mixed conception rather than the two principles of justice. Moreover, given the importance of the first principle, it seems that the essential feature of the contract theory is preserved in these alternatives.

Now it is evident from these remarks that mixed conceptions are much more difficult to argue against than the principle of utility. Many writers who seem to profess a variant of the utilitarian view, even if it is expressed vaguely as the balancing and harmonizing of social interests, clearly presuppose a fixed constitutional system that guarantees the basic freedoms to a certain minimum degree. Thus they actually hold some mixed doctrine, and therefore the strong arguments from liberty cannot be used as before. The main problem, then, is what can still be said in favor of the second principle over that of utility when both are constrained by the principle of equal liberty. We need to examine the reasons for rejecting the standard of utility even in this instance, although it is clear that these reasons will not be as decisive as those for rejecting the classical and average doctrines.

Consider first a mixed conception that is rather close to the principles of justice: namely, the view arising when the principle of average utility constrained by a certain social minimum is substituted for the difference principle, everything else remaining unchanged. Now the difficulty here is the same as that with intuitionist doctrines generally: how is the social minimum to be selected and adjusted to changing circumstances? Anyone using the two principles of justice might also appear to be striking a balance between maximizing average utility and maintaining an appropriate social minimum. If we attended only to his considered judgments and not to his reason for these judgments, his appraisals might be indistinguishable from those of someone following this mixed conception. There is, I assume, sufficient latitude in the determination of the level of the social minimum under varying conditions to bring about this result. How do we know, then, that a person who adopts this mixed view does not in fact rely on the difference principle? To be sure, he is not conscious of invoking it, and indeed he may even repudiate the suggestion that he does so. But it turns out that the level assigned to the required minimum that constrains the principle of average utility leads to precisely the same consequences that would arise if he were in fact following this criterion. Moreover, he is unable to explain why he chooses the minimum as he does; the best he can say is that he makes the decision that seems most reasonable to him. Now it is going too far to claim that such a person is really using the difference principle, since his judgments may match some other standard. Yet it is true that his conception of justice is still to be identified. The leeway behind the scenes for the determination of the proper minimum leaves the matter unsettled.

Similar things can be said concerning other mixed theories. Thus one might decide to constrain the average principle by setting up some distributional requirement either by itself or in conjunction with some suitably chosen minimum. For example, one might substitute for the difference principle the criterion to maximize the average utility less some fraction (or multiple) of the standard deviation of the resulting distribution.43 Since this deviation is smallest when everyone achieves the same utility, this criterion indicates a greater concern for the less favored than the average principle. Now the intuitionistic features of this view are also clear, for we need to ask how the fraction (or multiple) of the standard deviation is to be selected and how this parameter is to vary with the average itself. Once again the difference principle may stand in the background. This sort of mixed view is on a par with other intuitionistic conceptions that direct us to follow a plurality of ends. For it holds that provided a certain floor is maintained, greater average well-being and a more equal distribution are both desirable ends. One institution is unambiguously preferable to another if it is better on each count.

Different political views, however, balance these ends differently, and we need criteria for determining their relative weights. The fact is that we do not in general agree to very much when we acknowledge ends of this kind. It must be recognized that a fairly detailed weighting of aims is implicit in a reasonably complete conception of justice. In everyday life we often content ourselves with enumerating common sense precepts and objectives of policy, adding that on particular questions we have to balance them in the light of the general facts of the situation. While this is sound practical advice, it does not express an articulated conception of justice. One is being told in effect to exercise one's judgment as best one can within the framework of these ends as guidelines. Only policies preferable on each score are clearly more desirable. By contrast, the

<sup>43.</sup> For a view of this kind, see Nicholas Rescher, *Distributive Justice* (New York, Bobbs-Merrill, 1966), pp. 35–38.

difference principle is a relatively precise conception, since it ranks all combinations of objectives according to how well they promote the prospects of the least favored.

Thus despite the fact that the difference principle seems offhand to be a somewhat special conception, it may still be the criterion which when adjoined to the other principles of justice stands in the background and controls the weights expressed in our everyday judgments as these would be matched by various mixed principles. Our customary way of relying on intuition guided by lower-order standards may obscure the existence of more basic principles that account for the force of these criteria. Of course, whether the two principles of justice, and especially the difference principle, explicate our judgments of distributive justice can only be decided by developing the consequences of these principles in some detail and noting how far we are prepared to accept the weights to which they lead. Possibly there will be no conflict between these consequences and our considered convictions. Certainly there should be none with those judgments that are fixed points, ones that we seem unwilling to revise under any foreseeable circumstances. Otherwise the two principles are not fully acceptable and some revision has to be made.

But perhaps our everyday views do not entail anything very definite about the problem of balancing competing ends. If so, the main question is whether we can assent to the far more exact specification of our conception of justice which the two principles represent. Provided that certain fixed points are preserved, we have to decide the best way to fill in our conception of justice and to extend it to further cases. The two principles of justice may not so much oppose our intuitive convictions as provide a relatively concrete principle for questions that common sense finds unfamiliar and leaves undecided. Thus while the difference principle strikes us as strange at first, reflection upon its implications when it is suitably circumscribed may convince us that it either accords with our considered judgments, or else projects these convictions to new situations in an acceptable way.

In line with these remarks, we may note that it is a political convention of a democratic society to appeal to the common interest. No political party publicly admits to pressing for legislation to the disadvantage of any recognized social group. But how is this convention to be understood? Surely it is something more than the principle of efficiency, and we cannot assume that government affects everyone's interest equally. Since it is impossible to maximize with respect to more than one point of view, it is natural, given the ethos of a democratic society, to single out that of the least advantaged and to further their long-term prospects in the best manner consistent with the equal liberties and fair opportunity. It seems that the policies in the justice of which we have the greatest confidence do at least tend in this direction in the sense that this sector of society would be worse off should they be curtailed. These policies are just throughout even if they are not perfectly just. The difference principle can therefore be interpreted as a reasonable extension of the political convention of a democracy once we face up to the necessity of adopting a reasonably complete conception of justice.

In noting that the mixed conceptions have intuitionistic features, I do not mean that this fact is a decisive objection to them. As I have already observed (§7), such combinations of principles are certainly of great practical value. There is no question but that these conceptions identify plausible standards by reference to which policies may be appraised, and given the appropriate background institutions, they may guide us to sound conclusions. For example, a person who accepts the mixed conception to maximize average well-being less some fraction (or multiple) of the standard deviation will presumably favor fair equality of opportunity, for it seems that having more equal chances for all both raises the average (via increases in efficiency) and decreases inequality. In this instance the substitute for the difference principle supports the other part of the second principle. Furthermore it is evident that at some point we cannot avoid relying upon our intuitive judgments. The difficulty with the mixed conceptions is that they may resort to these judgments too soon and fail to define a clear alternative to the difference principle. In the absence of a procedure for assigning the appropriate weights (or parameters), it is possible that the balance is actually determined by the principles of justice, unless of course these principles yield conclusions that we cannot accept. Should this happen, then some mixed conception despite its appeal to intuition may be preferable, especially if its use helps to introduce order and agreement into our considered convictions.

Another consideration favoring the difference principle is the comparative ease with which it can be interpreted and applied. Indeed to some, part of the attractiveness of mixed criteria is that they are a way to avoid the relatively sharp demands of the difference principle. It is fairly straightforward to ascertain what things will advance the interests of the least favored. This group can be identified by its index of primary goods, and policy questions can be settled by asking how the relevant representative man suitably situated would choose. But to the extent that the principle of utility is given a role, the vagueness in the idea of average (or total) well-being is troublesome. It is necessary to arrive at some estimate of utility functions for different representative persons and to set up an interpersonal correspondence between them, and so on. The problems in doing this are so great and the approximations are so rough that deeply conflicting opinions may seem equally plausible to different persons. Some may claim that the gains of one group outweigh the losses of another, while others may deny it. No one can say what underlying principles account for these differences or how they can be resolved. It is easier for those with the stronger social positions to advance their interests unjustly without being shown to be clearly out of bounds. Of course all this is obvious, and it has always been recognized that ethical principles are vague. Nevertheless they are not all equally imprecise, and the two principles of justice have an advantage in the greater clarity of their demands and in what needs to be done to satisfy them.

It might be thought that the vagueness of the principle of utility can be overcome by a better account of how to measure and to aggregate wellbeing. I do not wish to stress these much discussed technical problems, since the more important objections to utilitarianism are at another level. But a brief mention of these matters will clarify the contract doctrine. Now there are several ways of establishing an interpersonal measure of utility. One of these (going back at least to Edgeworth) is to suppose that an individual is able to distinguish only a finite number of utility levels.44 A person is said to be indifferent between alternatives that belong to the same discrimination level, and the cardinal measure of the utility difference between any two alternatives is defined by the number of distinguishable levels that separate them. The cardinal scale that results is unique, as it must be, up to a positive linear transformation. To set up a measure between persons one might assume that the difference between adjacent levels is the same for all individuals and the same between all levels. With this interpersonal correspondence rule the calculations are extremely simple. In comparing alternatives we ascertain the number of levels between them for each individual and then sum, taking account of the pluses and minuses.

This conception of cardinal utility suffers from well-known difficulties. Leaving aside the obvious practical problems and the fact that the detection of a person's discrimination levels depends upon the alternatives actually available, it seems impossible to justify the assumption that

<sup>44.</sup> See A. K. Sen, *Collective Choice and Social Welfare* (San Francisco, Holden-Day, 1970), pp. 93f; for Edgeworth, see *Mathematical Psychics* (London, 1888), pp. 7–9, 60f.

the social utility of a shift from one level to another is the same for all individuals. On the one hand, this procedure would weigh identically those changes involving the same number of discriminations that individuals felt differently about, some having stronger feelings than others; while on the other hand, it would count more heavily the changes experienced by those individuals who appear to make more discriminations. Surely it is unsatisfactory to discount the strength of attitudes, and especially to reward so highly the capacity for noting distinctions which may vary systematically with temperament and training.45 Indeed, the whole procedure seems arbitrary. It has the merit, however, of illustrating the way in which the principle of utility is likely to contain implicit ethical assumptions in the method chosen for establishing the required measure of utility. The concept of happiness and well-being is not sufficiently determinate, and even to define a suitable cardinal measure we may have to look at the moral theory in which it will be used.

Analogous difficulties arise with the Neumann-Morgenstern definition.46 It can be shown that if an individual's choices between risky prospects satisfy certain postulates, then there exist utility numbers corresponding to the alternatives in such a way that his decisions can be interpreted as maximizing expected utility. He chooses as if he were guided by the mathematical expectation of these utility numbers; and these assignments of utility are unique up to a positive linear transformation. Of course, it is not maintained that the individual himself uses an assignment of utilities in making his decisions. These numbers do not guide his choices, nor do they provide a first-person procedure of deliberation. Rather, given that a person's preferences among prospects fulfill certain conditions, the observing mathematician can, theoretically at least, compute numbers that describe these preferences as maximizing expected utility in the sense defined. So far nothing follows about the actual course of reflection, or the criteria, if any, that the individual relies upon; nor is anything implied about what features of the alternatives the utility numbers correspond to or represent.

Now assuming that we can set up a cardinal utility for each person, how is the interpersonal measure to be established? A familiar proposal is the zero-one rule: assign the value zero to the individual's worst possible situation and value one to his best situation. Offhand this seems fair,

<sup>45.</sup> For these difficulties, see Sen, ibid., pp. 94f; and W. S. Vickrey, "Utility, Strategy, and Social Decision Rules," *Quarterly Journal of Economics,* vol. 74 (1960), pp. 519–522.

<sup>46.</sup> For an account of this, see Baumol, *Economic Theory and Operations Analysis,* pp. 512–528; and Luce and Raiffa, *Games and Decisions,* pp. 12–38.

perhaps expressing in another way the idea that each is to count for one and no more than one. Yet there are other proposals with comparable symmetry, for example, that which assigns the value zero to the worst alternative and the value one to the sum of the utilities from all alternatives.47 Both of these rules seem equally just, since the first postulates equal maximum utility for everyone, the latter equal average utility; but they may lead to different social decisions. Furthermore, these proposals postulate in effect that all individuals have similar capacities for satisfaction, and this seems like an unusual price to pay merely to define an interpersonal measure. These rules clearly determine the concept of wellbeing in a special way, for the ordinary notion would appear to allow for variations in the sense that a different interpretation of the concept would be equally if not more compatible with common sense. Thus for example the zero-one rule implies that, other things equal, greater social utility results from educating people to have simple desires and to be easily satisfied; and that such persons will generally have the stronger claims. They are pleased with less and so presumably can be brought closer to their highest utility. If one cannot accept these consequences but still wishes to hold the utilitarian view, some other interpersonal measure must be found.

Further, we should observe that while the Neumann-Morgenstern postulates assume that individuals do not enjoy the experience of risk, the actual process of gambling, the resulting measure is nevertheless influenced by attitudes toward uncertainty as defined by the overall probability distribution.48 Thus if this definition of utility is used in social decisions, men's feelings about taking chances will affect the criterion of well-being that is to be maximized. Once again we see that the conventions defining interpersonal comparisons have unexpected moral consequences. As before the measure of utility is influenced by contingencies that are arbitrary from a moral point of view. The situation is very different from that of justice as fairness as shown by its Kantian interpretation, the embedding of ideals in its principles, and its reliance upon primary goods for the necessary interpersonal comparisons.

It would appear, then, that the vagueness of the utilitarian principle is not likely to be satisfactorily removed simply by a more precise measure of utility. To the contrary, once the conventions required for interpersonal comparisons are examined, we see that there are various methods for

<sup>47.</sup> See Sen, *Collective Choice and Social Welfare,* p. 98.

<sup>48.</sup> See Arrow, *Social Choice and Individual Values,* p. 10; and Sen, ibid., pp. 96f.

defining these comparisons. Yet these methods involve strikingly different assumptions and presumably have very different consequences. It is a moral question which of these definitions and correspondence rules, if any, are appropriate for a conception of justice. This is what is meant, I believe, when it is said that interpersonal comparisons depend upon value judgments. While it is obvious that the acceptance of the principle of utility is a matter for moral theory, it is less evident that the very procedures for measuring well-being raise similar problems. Since there is more than one such procedure, the choice depends upon the use to which the measure is to be put; and this means that ethical considerations will eventually be decisive.

Maine's comments on the standard utilitarian assumptions are apropos here. He suggests that the grounds for these assumptions are clear once we see that they are simply a working rule of legislation, and that this is how Bentham regarded them.49 Given a populous and reasonably homogeneous society and an energetic modern legislature, the only principle that can guide legislation on a large scale is the principle of utility. The necessity to neglect differences between persons, even very real ones, leads to the maxim to count all equally, and to the similarity and marginal postulates. Surely the conventions for interpersonal comparisons are to be judged in the same light. The contract doctrine holds that once we see this, we shall also see that the idea of measuring and summing well-being is best abandoned entirely. Viewed from the perspective of the original position, it is not part of a feasible conception of social justice. Instead the two principles of justice are preferable and far simpler to apply. All things considered, there are still reasons for choosing the difference principle, or the second principle as a whole, over that of utility even in the restricted context of a mixed conception.

#### 50. THE PRINCIPLE OF PERFECTION

So far I have said very little about the principle of perfection. But having just considered mixed views, I should now like to examine this conception. There are two variants: in the first it is the sole principle of a teleological theory directing society to arrange institutions and to define the duties and obligations of individuals so as to maximize the

<sup>49.</sup> These remarks are found in H. S. Maine, *The Early History of Institutions* (London, 1897), pp. 399f.

achievement of human excellence in art, science, and culture. The principle obviously is more demanding the higher the relevant ideal is pitched. The absolute weight that Nietzsche sometimes gives the lives of great men such as Socrates and Goethe is unusual. At places he says that mankind must continually strive to produce great individuals. We give value to our lives by working for the good of the highest specimens.50 The second variant found in Aristotle among others has far stronger claims.

This more moderate doctrine is one in which a principle of perfection is accepted as but one standard among several in an intuitionist theory. The principle is to be balanced against others by intuition. The extent to which such a view is perfectionist depends, then, upon the weight given to the claims of excellence and culture. If for example it is maintained that in themselves the achievements of the Greeks in philosophy, science, and art justified the ancient practice of slavery (assuming that this practice was necessary for these achievements), surely the conception is highly perfectionist. The requirements of perfection override the strong claims of liberty. On the other hand, one may use the criterion simply to limit the redistribution of wealth and income under a constitutional regime. In this case it serves as a counterpoise to egalitarian ideas. Thus it may be said that distribution should indeed be more equal if this is essential for meeting the basic needs of those less favored and only diminishes the enjoyments and pleasures of those better off. But the greater happiness of the less fortunate does not in general justify curtailing the expenditures required to preserve cultural values. These forms of life have greater intrinsic worth than the lesser pleasures, however widely the latter are enjoyed. Under normal conditions a certain minimum of social resources must be kept aside to advance the ends of perfection. The only exception is when these claims clash with the demands of the basic needs. Thus given improving circumstances, the principle of perfection acquires an increasing weight relative to a greater satisfaction of desire. No doubt many have accepted perfectionism in this intuitionist form. It

50. See the passages cited in G. A. Morgan, *What Nietzsche Means* (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1941), pp. 40–42, 369–376. Particularly striking is Nietzsche's statement: "Mankind must work continually to produce individual great human beings—this and nothing else is the task . . . for the question is this: how can your life, the individual life, retain the highest value, the deepest significance? . . . Only by your living for the good of the rarest and most valuable specimens." *Untimely Meditations: Third Essay: Schopenhauer as Educator,* sec. 6, cited from J. R. Hollingsdale, *Nietzsche: The Man and His Philosophy* (Baton Rouge, Louisiana State University Press, 1965), p. 127.

allows for a range of interpretations and seems to express a far more reasonable view than the strict perfectionist theory.51

Before considering why the principle of perfection would be rejected, I should like to comment on the relation between the principles of justice and the two kinds of teleological theories, perfectionism and utilitarianism. We may define ideal-regarding principles as those which are not want-regarding principles.52 That is, they do not take as the only relevant features the overall amount of want-satisfaction and the way in which it is distributed among persons. Now in terms of this distinction, the principles of justice as well as the principle of perfection (either variant) are ideal-regarding principles. They do not abstract from the aims of desires and hold that satisfactions are of equal value when they are equally intense and pleasurable (the meaning of Bentham's remark that, other things equal, pushpin is as good as poetry). As we have seen (§41), a certain ideal is embedded in the principles of justice, and the fulfillment of desires incompatible with these principles has no value at all. Moreover we are to encourage certain traits of character, especially a sense of justice. Thus the contract doctrine is similar to perfectionism in that it takes into account other things than the net balance of satisfaction and how it is shared. In fact, the principles of justice do not even mention the amount or the distribution of welfare but refer only to the distribution of liberties and the other primary goods. At the same time, they manage to define an ideal of the person without invoking a prior standard of human excellence. The contract view occupies, therefore, an intermediate position between perfectionism and utilitarianism.

Turning to the question whether a perfectionist standard would be adopted, we may consider first the strict perfectionist conception, since here the problems are more obvious. Now in order to have a clear sense, this criterion must provide some way of ranking different kinds of achievements and summing their values. Of course this assessment may not be very exact, but it should be accurate enough to guide the main decisions concerning the basic structure. It is at this point that the princi-

<sup>51.</sup> For this kind of view, see Bertrand de Jouvenal, *The Ethics of Redistribution* (Cambridge, The University Press, 1951), pp. 53–56, 62–65. See also Hastings Rashdall, *The Theory of Good and Evil* (London, Oxford University Press, 1907), vol. I, pp. 235–243, who argues for the principle that everyone's good is to count for as much as the like good of anyone else, the criteria of perfection being relevant in determining when persons' goods are equal. The capacity for a higher life is a ground for treating men unequally. See pp. 240–242. A similar view is implicit in G. E. Moore, *Principia Ethica,* ch. VI.

<sup>52.</sup> The definition is from Barry, *Political Argument,* pp. 39f.

ple of perfection gets into difficulty. For while the persons in the original position take no interest in one another's interests, they know that they have (or may have) certain moral and religious interests and other cultural ends which they cannot put in jeopardy. Moreover, they are assumed to be committed to different conceptions of the good and they think that they are entitled to press their claims on one another to further their separate aims. The parties do not share a conception of the good by reference to which the fruition of their powers or even the satisfaction of their desires can be evaluated. They do not have an agreed criterion of perfection that can be used as a principle for choosing between institutions. To acknowledge any such standard would be, in effect, to accept a principle that might lead to a lesser religious or other liberty, if not to a loss of freedom altogether to advance many of one's spiritual ends. If the standard of excellence is reasonably clear, the parties have no way of knowing that their claims may not fall before the higher social goal of maximizing perfection. Thus it seems that the only understanding that the persons in the original position can reach is that everyone should have the greatest equal liberty consistent with a similar liberty for others. They cannot risk their freedom by authorizing a standard of value to define what is to be maximized by a teleological principle of justice. This case is entirely different from that of agreeing to an index of primary goods as a basis of interpersonal comparisons. The index plays a subordinate role in any event, and primary goods are things that men generally want in order to achieve their ends whatever they are. Wanting these goods does not distinguish between one person and another. But of course accepting them for the purpose of an index does not establish a standard of excellence.

It is evident, then, that much the same argument that led to the principle of equal liberty requires the rejection of the principle of perfection. But in making this argument I have not contended that the criteria of excellence lack a rational basis from the standpoint of everyday life. Clearly there are standards in the arts and sciences for appraising creative efforts, at least within particular styles and traditions of thought. Very often it is beyond question that the work of one person is superior to that of another. Indeed, the freedom and well-being of individuals, when measured by the excellence of their activities and works, is vastly different in value. This is true not only of actual performance but of potential performance as well. Comparisons of intrinsic value can obviously be made; and although the standard of perfection is not a principle of justice, judgments of value have an important place in human affairs. They are not necessarily so vague that they must fail as a workable basis for assigning rights. The argument is rather that in view of their disparate aims the parties have no reason to adopt the principle of perfection given the conditions of the original position.

In order to arrive at the ethic of perfectionism, we should have to attribute to the parties a prior acceptance of some natural duty, say the duty to develop human persons of a certain style and aesthetic grace, and to advance the pursuit of knowledge and the cultivation of the arts. But this assumption would drastically alter the interpretation of the original position. While justice as fairness allows that in a well-ordered society the values of excellence are recognized, the human perfections are to be pursued within the limits of the principle of free association. Persons join together to further their cultural and artistic interests in the same way that they form religious communities. They do not use the coercive apparatus of the state to win for themselves a greater liberty or larger distributive shares on the grounds that their activities are of more intrinsic value. Perfectionism is denied as a political principle. Thus the social resources necessary to support associations dedicated to advancing the arts and sciences and culture generally are to be won as a fair return for services rendered, or from such voluntary contributions as citizens wish to make, all within a regime regulated by the two principles of justice.

On the contract doctrine, then, the equal liberty of citizens does not presuppose that the ends of different persons have the same intrinsic value, nor that their freedom and well-being is of the same worth. It is postulated though that the parties are moral persons, rational individuals with a coherent system of ends and a capacity for a sense of justice. Since they have the requisite defining properties, it would be superfluous to add that the parties are equally moral persons. We can say if we wish that men have equal dignity, meaning by this simply that they all satisfy the conditions of moral personality expressed by the interpretation of the initial contractual situation. And being alike in this respect, they are to be treated as the principles of justice require (§77). But none of this implies that their activities and accomplishments are of equal excellence. To think this is to conflate the notion of moral personality with the various perfections that fall under the concept of value.

I have just noted that persons' being of equal value is not necessary for equal liberty. It should also be observed that their being of equal value is not sufficient either. Sometimes it is said that equality of basic rights follows from the equal capacity of individuals for the higher forms of life; but it is not clear why this should be so. Intrinsic worth is a notion falling under the concept of value, and whether equal liberty or some other principle is appropriate depends upon the conception of right. Now the criterion of perfection insists that rights in the basic structure be assigned so as to maximize the total of intrinsic value. Presumably the configuration of rights and opportunities enjoyed by individuals affects the degree to which they bring to fruition their latent powers and excellences. But it does not follow that an equal distribution of basic freedoms is the best solution.

The situation resembles that of classical utilitarianism: we require postulates parallel to the standard assumptions. Thus even if the latent abilities of individuals were similar, unless the assignment of rights is governed by a principle of diminishing marginal value (estimated in this case by the criteria for excellence), equal rights would not be insured. Indeed, unless there are bountiful resources, the sum of value might be best increased by very unequal rights and opportunities favoring a few. Doing this is not unjust on the perfectionist view provided that it is necessary to produce a greater sum of human excellence. Now a principle of diminishing marginal value is certainly questionable, although perhaps not as much so as that of equal value. There is little reason to suppose that, in general, rights and resources allocated to encourage and to cultivate highly talented persons contribute less and less to the total beyond some point in the relevant range. To the contrary, this contribution may grow (or stay constant) indefinitely. The principle of perfection provides, then, an insecure foundation for the equal liberties and it would presumably depart widely from the difference principle. The assumptions required for equality seem extremely implausible. To find a firm basis for equal liberty, it seems that we must reject the traditional teleological principles, both perfectionist and utilitarian.

So far I have been discussing perfectionism as a single-principle teleological theory. With this variant the difficulties are most evident. The intuitionistic forms are much more plausible, and when the claims of perfection are weighted with moderation, these views are not easy to argue against. The discrepancy from the two principles of justice is much less. Nevertheless similar problems do arise, for each principle of an intuitionistic view must be chosen, and while the consequences are not likely to be so great in this case, there is as before no basis for acknowledging a principle of perfection as a standard of social justice. In addition, criteria of excellence are imprecise as political principles, and their application to public questions is bound to be unsettled and idiosyncratic, however reasonably they may be invoked and accepted within narrower traditions and communities of thought. It is for this reason, among others, that justice as fairness requires us to show that modes of conduct interfere with the basic liberties of others or else violate some obligation or natural duty before they can be restricted. For it is when arguments to this conclusion fail that individuals are tempted to appeal to perfectionist criteria in an ad hoc manner. When it is said, for example, that certain kinds of sexual relationships are degrading and shameful, and should be prohibited on this basis, if only for the sake of the individuals in question irrespective of their wishes, it is often because a reasonable case cannot be made in terms of the principles of justice. Instead we fall back on notions of excellence. But in these matters we are likely to be influenced by subtle aesthetic preferences and personal feelings of propriety; and individual, class, and group differences are often sharp and irreconcilable. Since these uncertainties plague perfectionist criteria and jeopardize individual liberty, it seems best to rely entirely on the principles of justice which have a more definite structure.53 Thus even in its intuitionistic form, perfectionism would be rejected as not defining a feasible basis of social justice.

Eventually of course we would have to check whether the consequences of doing without a standard of perfection are acceptable, since offhand it may seem as if justice as fairness does not allow enough scope for ideal-regarding considerations. At this point I can only note that public funds for the arts and sciences may be provided through the exchange branch (§43). In this instance there are no restrictions on the reasons citizens may have for imposing upon themselves the requisite taxes. They may assess the merits of these public goods on perfectionist principles, since the coercive machinery of government is used in this case only to overcome the problems of isolation and assurance, and no one is taxed without his consent. The criterion of excellence does not serve here as a political principle; and so, if it wishes, a well-ordered society can devote a sizable fraction of its resources to expenditures of this kind. But while the claims of culture can be met in this way, the principles of justice do not permit subsidizing universities and institutes, or opera and the theater, on the grounds that these institutions are intrinsically valuable, and that those who engage in them are to be supported

<sup>53.</sup> Illustrative of this point is the controversy concerning the so-called enforcement of morals, morality often having the narrow sense of sexual morality. See Patrick Devlin, *The Enforcement of Morals* (London, Oxford University Press, 1965), and H. L. A. Hart, *Law, Liberty and Morality* (Stanford, Calif., Stanford University Press, 1963), who take different positions on this issue. For further discussion see Brian Barry, *Political Argument,* pp. 66–69; Ronald Dworkin, "Lord Devlin and the Enforcement of Morals," *Yale Law Journal,* vol. 75 (1966); and A. R. Louch, "Sins and Crimes," *Philosophy,* vol. 43 (1968).

even at some significant expense to others who do not receive compensating benefits. Taxation for these purposes can be justified only as promoting directly or indirectly the social conditions that secure the equal liberties and as advancing in an appropriate way the long-term interests of the least advantaged. This seems to authorize those subsidies the justice of which is least in dispute, and so in these cases anyway there is no evident need for a principle of perfection.

With these remarks I conclude the discussion of how the principles of justice apply to institutions. Clearly there are many further questions that should be considered. Other forms of perfectionism are possible and each problem has been examined only briefly. I should emphasize that my intention is solely to indicate that the contract doctrine may serve well enough as an alternative moral conception. When we check its consequences for institutions, it appears to match our common sense convictions more accurately than its traditional rivals, and to extrapolate to previously unsettled cases in a reasonable way.
