---
images: []
order: 29
title: CHAPTER VII. GOODNESS AS RATIONALITY
---

In this final part I proceed as follows. First, I present in more detail the theory of the good which has already been used to characterize primary goods and the interests of the persons in the original position. Since a more comprehensive view is required for the subsequent argument, this theory must be given a firmer foundation. The next chapter is largely concerned with moral psychology and the acquisition of the sentiment of justice. Once these matters have been dealt with, we are in a position to discuss the relative stability of justice as fairness and to argue in the last chapter that, in a sense to be defined, justice and goodness are congruent, at least in the circumstances of a well-ordered society. Last of all I explain how the theory of justice connects up with the social values and the good of community. Sometimes in this part the overall direction of the exposition may seem less clear, and the transition from one topic to another more abrupt. It might help to keep in mind that the central aim is to prepare the way to settle the questions of stability and congruence, and to account for the values of society and the good of justice.

#### 60. THE NEED FOR A THEORY OF THE GOOD

So far I have said very little about the concept of goodness. It was briefly mentioned earlier when I suggested that a person's good is determined by what is for him the most rational plan of life given reasonably favorable circumstances (§15). All along I have assumed that in a well-ordered society citizens' conceptions of their good conform to the principles of right publicly recognized and include an appropriate place for the various primary goods. But the concept of goodness has been used only in a rather thin sense. And in fact I shall distinguish between two theories of the good. The reason for doing this is that in justice as fairness the concept of right is prior to that of the good. In contrast with teleological theories, something is good only if it fits into ways of life consistent with the principles of right already on hand. But to establish these principles it is necessary to rely on some notion of goodness, for we need assumptions about the parties' motives in the original position. Since these assumptions must not jeopardize the prior place of the concept of right, the theory of the good used in arguing for the principles of justice is restricted to the bare essentials. This account of the good I call the thin theory: its purpose is to secure the premises about primary goods required to arrive at the principles of justice. Once this theory is worked out and the primary goods accounted for, we are free to use the principles of justice in the further development of what I shall call the full theory of the good.

In order to clarify these matters, let us recall where a theory of the good has already played a role. First of all, it is used to define the least favored members of society. The difference principle assumes that this can be done. It is true that the theory need not define a cardinal measure of welfare. We do not have to know how disadvantaged the least fortunate are, since once this group is singled out, we can take their ordinal preferences (from the appropriate point of view) as determining the proper arrangement of the basic structure (§15). Nevertheless, we must be able to identify this group. Further, the index of well-being and the expectations of representative men are specified in terms of primary goods. Rational individuals, whatever else they want, desire certain things as prerequisites for carrying out their plans of life. Other things equal, they prefer a wider to a narrower liberty and opportunity, and a greater rather than a smaller share of wealth and income. That these things are good seems clear enough. But I have also said that self-respect and a sure confidence in the sense of one's own worth is perhaps the most important primary good. And this suggestion has been used in the argument for the two principles of justice (§29). Thus the initial definition of expectations solely by reference to such things as liberty and wealth is provisional; it is necessary to include other kinds of primary goods and these raise deeper questions. Obviously an account of the good is required for this; and it must be the thin theory.

Again, some view of goodness is used in defending justice as fairness against various objections. For example, it may be said that the persons in the original position know so little about their situation that a rational agreement upon principles of justice is impossible. Since they do not know what their aims are, they may find their plans utterly ruined by the principles to which they consent. Therefore how can they reach a sensible decision? One might reply that the rationality of a person's choice does not depend upon how much he knows, but only upon how well he reasons from whatever information he has, however incomplete. Our decision is perfectly rational provided that we face up to our circumstances and do the best we can. Thus the parties can in fact make a rational decision, and surely some of the alternative conceptions of justice are better than others. Nevertheless, the thin theory of the good which the parties are assumed to accept shows that they should try to secure their liberty and self-respect, and that, in order to advance their aims, whatever these are, they normally require more rather than less of the other primary goods. In entering into the original agreement, then, the parties suppose that their conceptions of the good have a certain structure, and this is sufficient to enable them to choose principles on a rational basis.

Summing up these points, we need what I have called the thin theory of the good to explain the rational preference for primary goods and to explicate the notion of rationality underlying the choice of principles in the original position. This theory is necessary to support the requisite premises from which the principles of justice are derived. But looking ahead to other questions yet to be discussed, a more comprehensive account of the good is essential. Thus the definition of beneficent and supererogatory acts depends upon such a theory. So likewise does the definition of the moral worth of persons. This is the third main concept of ethics and we must find a place for it within the contract view. Eventually we shall have to consider whether being a good person is a good thing for that person, if not in general, then under what conditions. In some circumstances at least, for example those of a society well-ordered or in a state of near justice, it turns out, I believe, that being a good person is indeed a good. This fact is intimately connected with the good of justice and the problem of the congruence of a moral theory. We need an account of the good to spell all this out. The characteristic feature of this full theory, as I have said, is that it takes the principles of justice as already secured, and then uses these principles in defining the other moral concepts in which the notion of goodness is involved. Once the principles of right are on hand, we may appeal to them in explaining the concept of moral worth and the good of the moral virtues. Indeed, even rational plans of life which determine what things are good for human beings, the values of human life so to speak, are themselves constrained by the principles of justice. But clearly, to avoid moving in a circle, we must distinguish between the thin and the full theory, and always keep in mind which one we are relying upon.

Finally, when we come to the explanation of the social values and the stability of a conception of justice, a wider interpretation of the good is required. For example, one basic psychological principle is that we have a tendency to love those who manifestly love us, those who with evident intention advance our good. In this instance our good comprises final ends and not only primary goods. Moreover, in order to account for the social values, we need a theory that explains the good of activities, and in particular the good of everyone's willingly acting from the public conception of justice in affirming their social institutions. When we consider these questions we can work within the full theory. Sometimes we are examining the processes by which the sense of justice and moral sentiments are acquired; or else we are noting that the collective activities of a just society are also good. There is no reason for not using the full theory, since the conception of justice is available.

However, when we ask whether the sense of justice is a good, the important question clearly is that defined by the thin theory. We want to know whether having and maintaining a sense of justice is a good (in the thin sense) for persons who are members of a well-ordered society. Surely if the sentiment of justice is ever a good, it is a good in this special case. And if within the thin theory it turns out that having a sense of justice is indeed a good, then a well-ordered society is as stable as one can hope for. Not only does it generate its own supportive moral attitudes, but these attitudes are desirable from the standpoint of rational persons who have them when they assess their situation independently from the constraints of justice. This match between justice and goodness I refer to as congruence; and I shall examine this relation when we take up the good of justice (§86).

#### 61. THE DEFINITION OF GOOD FOR SIMPLER CASES

Rather than proceeding immediately to the application of the concept of rationality to the assessment of plans, it seems best to illustrate the definition I shall use by first considering simpler cases. Doing this will bring out several distinctions that are necessary for a clear understanding of its sense. Thus I suppose the definition to have three stages as follows (for simplicity these stages are formulated using the concept of goodness rather than that of better than): (1) A is a good X if and only if A has the properties (to a higher degree than the average1 or standard X) which it is rational to want in an X, given what X's are used for, or expected to do, and the like (whichever rider is appropriate); (2) A is a good X for K (where K is some person) if and only if A has the properties which it is rational for K to want in an X, given K's circumstances, abilities, and plan of life (his system of aims), and therefore in view of what he intends to do with an X, or whatever; (3) the same as 2 but adding a clause to the effect that K's plan of life, or that part of it relevant in the present instance, is itself rational. What rationality means in the case of plans has yet to be determined and will be discussed later on. But according to the definition, once we establish that an object has the properties that it is rational for someone with a rational plan of life to want, then we have shown that it is good for him. And if certain sorts of things satisfy this condition for persons generally, then these things are human goods. Eventually we want to be assured that liberty and opportunity, and a sense of our own worth, fall into this category.2

Now for a few comments on the first two stages of the definition. We tend to move from the first stage to the second whenever it is necessary to take into account the special features of a person's situation which the definition defines to be relevant. Typically these features are his interests, abilities, and circumstances. Although the principles of rational choice have not yet been set out, the everyday notion seems clear enough for the

<sup>1.</sup> See W. D. Ross, *The Right and the Good* (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1930), p. 67.

<sup>2.</sup> As I have remarked, there is wide agreement, with many variations, on an account of the good along these lines. See Aristotle, *Nicomachean Ethics,* bks. I and X; and Aquinas, *Summa Theologica,* I-I, q. 5–6, *Summa Contra Gentiles,* bk. III, chs. 1–63, and *Treatise on Happiness,* trans. J. A. Oesterle (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1964). For Kant, *The Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysics of Morals,* Academy Edition, vol. IV, pp. 415–419; and *The Critique of Practical Reason,* first part of ch. II, bk. I of pt. I. See H. J. Paton's discussion of Kant, *In Defense of Reason* (London, George Allen and Unwin, Ltd., 1951), pp. 157–177. For Sidgwick, *Methods of Ethics,* 7th ed. (London, Macmillan, 1907), bk. I, ch. IX, and bk. III, ch. XIV. This kind of view is held by idealists and those influenced by them. See, for example, F. H. Bradley, *Ethical Studies,* 2nd ed. (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1926), ch. II; and Josiah Royce, *The Philosophy of Loyalty* (New York, Macmillan, 1908), lect. II. And more recently, H. J. Paton, *The Good Will* (London, George Allen and Unwin, 1927), bks. II and III, esp. chs. VIII and IX; W. D. Lamont, *The Value Judgment* (Edinburgh, The University Press, 1955); and J. N. Findlay, *Values and Intentions* (London, George Allen and Unwin, 1961), ch. V, secs. I and III, and ch. VI. For the so-called naturalists in value theory, see John Dewey, *Human Nature and Conduct* (New York, Henry Holt, 1922), pt. III; R. B. Perry, *General Theory of Value* (New York, Longmans, Green, 1926), chs. XX–XXII; and C. I. Lewis, *An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation* (LaSalle, Ill., Open Court Publishing Co., 1946), bk. III. My account is indebted to J. O. Urmson, "On Grading," *Mind,* vol. 59 (1950); Paul Ziff, *Semantic Analysis* (Ithaca, N.Y., Cornell University Press, 1960), ch. VI; and Philippa Foot, "Goodness and Choice," *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,* supp. vol. 35 (1961), though they may not approve of what I say.

time being. In general, there is a reasonably precise sense in speaking simply of a good object of a certain kind, a sense explained by the first stage, provided that there is enough similarity of interests and circumstances among persons concerned with objects of this kind so that recognized standards can be established. When these conditions are met, saying that something is good conveys useful information. There is sufficient common experience with or knowledge of these things for us to have an understanding of the desired features exemplified by an average or standard object. Often there are conventional criteria founded upon commercial or other practice which define these properties.<sup>3</sup> By taking up various examples we could no doubt see how these criteria evolve and the relevant standards determined. The essential point, however, is that these criteria depend upon the nature of the objects in question and upon our experience with them; and therefore we say that certain things are good without further elaboration only when a certain background is presupposed or some particular context is taken for granted. The basic value judgments are those made from the standpoint of persons, given their interests, abilities, and circumstances. Only insofar as a similarity of conditions permits can we safely abstract from anyone's special situation. In cases of any complexity, when the thing to be chosen should be adjusted to specific wants and situations, we move to the second stage of the definition. Our judgments of value are tailored to the agent in question as this stage requires.

These remarks may be illustrated by looking at several examples from certain typical categories: artifacts, functional parts of systems, and occupations and roles. Among artifacts, a good watch, say, is one that has the features which it is rational to want in a watch. There are clearly a number of desired features here, in addition to that of keeping accurate time. It must not be excessively heavy, for example. These features must be measured somehow and assigned appropriate weights in the overall assessment. I shall not consider here how these things are done. It is worth noting, however, that if we take the definition of good in the traditional sense as an analysis, that is, as a statement of concept identity, and if we suppose that by definition a watch is an article used to tell time, and that by definition rationality is taking effective means to achieve one's ends, then it is analytic that a good watch is one that keeps accurate time. This fact is established solely by virtue of truths of logic and definitions of concepts. But since I do not wish to take the definition of good in

<sup>3.</sup> See Urmson, "On Grading," pp. 148-154.

this sense but rather as a rough guideline for constructing substitute expressions that can be used to say what on reflection we want to say, I do not count this statement as analytic. In fact, for our present purposes I shall sidestep this question entirely and simply take certain facts about watches (or whatever) as common knowledge. There is no occasion to ask whether the statements that express them are analytic. On this account, then, it is certainly true that a good watch keeps accurate time and this correspondence with everyday facts suffices to confirm the propriety of the definition.

Again, it is plain that the letter "X" in the phrase "a good X" often has to be replaced by various noun phrases depending on the context. Thus it is usually not enough to speak of good watches, since we frequently need a more fine-grained classification. We are called upon to assess wrist watches, stop watches, and so on; or even wrist watches to go with a particular kind of evening dress. In all these cases special interests give rise to certain appropriate classifications and standards. These complications are ordinarily gathered from the circumstances and are explicitly mentioned when it seems necessary. With things that are not artifacts some elaboration is usually called for to explain one's meaning since it is not provided by the reference to the object. Thus, for example, the statement that Wildcat is a good mountain may require the kind of amplification provided by adding that it is a good mountain for skiing. Or the observation that it is a good night may call for the explanation that it is a good night for seeing the stars, since it is a clear and dark night. Some terms suggest the appropriate expansion. Consider an example: if we compare the statement that a body is a good corpse with the statement that it is a good cadaver, the sense of the first is not clear, whereas referring to something as a cadaver conveys its use in the study of anatomy. A good cadaver is presumably a corpse having the properties (whatever they are) which it is rational to want for this purpose.<sup>4</sup> It may be noted in passing that we can understand at least part of what is meant by calling something good even though we do not know what are the desired features of the object being evaluated.

There always stands in the background a point of view from which an artifact, functional part, or role is being appraised, although of course this point of view need not be made explicit. This perspective is characterized by identifying the persons whose concerns are relevant for making the judgment, and then by describing the interests which they take in the

<sup>4.</sup> The example is from Ziff, Semantic Analysis, p. 211.

object. For example, in the case of parts of the body (functional parts of systems), we normally take up the point of view of the person in question and presume that his interest is the normal one. Thus good eyes and ears are those having the properties that it is rational to want in one's own eyes and ears when one wishes to see and hear well. Similarly with animals and plants: when we say that they have a good coat, or good roots, we appear to adopt the point of view of the animal or plant. No doubt there is some artificiality in doing this, especially in the case of plants. On the other hand, perhaps there are other perspectives that would explain these judgments more naturally. But the definition is likely to be more suitable for some cases than others, and this fact need not worry us too much so long as it is satisfactory for the purposes of the theory of justice. Turning to the category of occupations, in some instances anyway while the desired properties are those of persons belonging to the occupation, the persons whose point of view we take up do not belong to it. Thus a good doctor is one who has the skills and abilities that it is rational for his patients to want in a doctor. The skills and abilities are the doctor's, the interest in the restoration of health by which they are assessed are the patients'. These illustrations show that the point of view varies from case to case and the definition of goodness contains no general formula for determining it. These matters are explained as the occasion arises or gathered from the context.

A further comment is that there is nothing necessarily right, or morally correct, about the point of view from which things are judged to be good or bad. One may say of a man that he is a good spy, or a good assassin, without approving of his skills. Applying the definition to this case, we would be interpreted as saying that the individual referred to has the attributes that it is rational to want in a spy, or assassin, given what spies and assassins are expected to do. There is no implication that it is proper to want spies and assassins to do what they do. Normally it is governments and conspirators and the like who employ spies and assassins. We are simply evaluating certain proficiencies and talents from the point of view of governments and conspirators. Whether a spy or assassin is a good person is a separate question altogether; to answer it we should have to judge the cause for which he works and his motives for doing so.

Now this moral neutrality of the definition of good is exactly what we should expect. The concept of rationality by itself is not an adequate basis

<sup>5.</sup> On this point, see Ross, *The Right and the Good*, p. 67. A somewhat different view is expressed by A. E. Duncan-Jones, "Good Things and Good Thieves," *Analysis*, vol. 27 (1966), pp. 113–118.

for the concept of right; and in contract theory the latter is derived in another way. Moreover, to construct the conception of moral goodness, the principles of right and justice must be introduced. It is easy to see that with many occupations and roles moral principles have an important place in characterizing the desired properties. For example, a good judge has a strong desire to give justice, to decide cases fairly in accordance with what the law requires. He possesses the judicial virtues which his position demands: he is impartial, able to assess the evidence fairly, not prejudiced or moved by personal considerations. These attributes may not suffice but they are generally necessary. The characterizations of a good father or wife, friend or associate, and so on indefinitely, rely upon a theory of the virtues and therefore presuppose the principles of right. These matters belong to the full theory. In order for goodness as rationality to hold for the concept of moral worth, it must turn out that the virtues are properties that it is rational for persons to want in one another when they adopt the requisite point of view. I shall try to show in due course that this is in fact the case (§66).

#### 62. A NOTE ON MEANING

I shall supplement this account of the thin theory with a few words about the meaning of judgments of value. These matters are not central to our inquiry but several comments may prevent misunderstanding. Perhaps the chief issue is whether these judgments represent a descriptive or a prescriptive use of language. Unfortunately the notions of a descriptive and a prescriptive use are obscure, but I shall try to come to the main point straightway.<sup>6</sup> All sides seem to agree upon two general facts. First, the terms "good" and "bad" and the like are typically used in giving advice and counsel, and to praise and extol, and so on. To be sure, these terms are not always used in this manner, since they may appear in conditional statements, in commands and questions, as well as in other remarks that have no practical bearings. Still, their role in giving advice and counsel and in praising and extolling is characteristic. Second, the criteria for evaluation vary from one kind of thing to another. What is wanted in dwellings is not what is wanted in clothes. A satisfactory definition of the goodness must fit these two facts.

6. For the most part my account follows J. R. Searle, "Meaning and Speech Acts," *Philosophical Review*, vol. 71 (1962). See also his *Meaning and Speech Acts* (Cambridge, The University Press, 1969), ch. VI; and Ziff, *Semantic Analysis*, ch. VI.

Now I shall simply define a descriptive theory as maintaining the following pair of theses. First, despite the variation in criteria from object to object, the term "good" has a constant sense (or meaning) that, for philosophical purposes, is of the same kind as that of other predicates normally counted as descriptive. Indeed, this constant sense enables us to understand why and how the criteria for evaluation vary from one kind of thing to another. The other thesis is that the propriety of using the term "good" (and its relatives) in giving advice and counsel, and in expressions of commendation, is explained by this constant sense together with a general theory of meaning. I assume that this theory includes an account of speech acts and illocutionary forces along the lines suggested by Austin. A descriptive theory holds that the constant descriptive meaning of good accounts for its being used, when in fact it is properly used, to praise and to advise, and the like. There is no necessity to assign "good" a special kind of meaning which is not already explained by its constant descriptive sense and the general theory of speech acts.

Goodness as rationality is a descriptive theory in this sense. In the required way, it explains the two general facts which everyone recognizes. The constant sense of "good" is characterized by the definition in its several stages. Thus something's being good is its having the properties that it is rational to want in things of its kind, plus further elaborations depending on the case. In the light of this definition it is easy to account for the fact that the criteria of evaluation differ from one kind of thing to another. Since we want things for different purposes, it is obviously rational to assess them by different features. It is helpful to think of the sense of "good" as being analogous to that of a function sign. <sup>8</sup> We can then view the definition as assigning to each kind of thing a set of properties by which instances of that kind are to be assessed, namely, the properties which it is rational to want in things of that kind.

Furthermore, the account of goodness as rationality explains why the term "good" appears in statements of advice and counsel, and in remarks of praise and approval. Thus, for example, when we are asked for advice someone wishes to have our opinion as to which course of action, say, is best for him. He wants to know what we think is rational for him to do. A climber who advises another about the equipment and route to use on a difficult pitch takes up the other's standpoint and recommends what he thinks is a sensible plan of attack. The meaning of "good" and of related

<sup>7.</sup> See J. L. Austin, How To Do Things with Words (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1962), esp. pp. 99–109, 113–116, 145f.

<sup>8.</sup> Here I borrow from P. T. Geach, "Good and Evil," Analysis, vol. 17 (1956), pp. 37f.

expressions does not change in those statements that are counted as advisory. It is the context that converts what we say into advice even though the sense of our words is the same. Climbers, for example, have a duty of mutual aid to help one another, and hence they have a duty to offer their considered opinion in urgent circumstances. In these situations their words become advisory. And so as the situation warrants, what we say may be, and in some cases must be, reckoned as advice and counsel. Accepting the theory of right already sketched, the constant descriptive sense together with the general reasons why persons seek out the views of others explain these characteristic uses of "good." At no point must we appeal to a special kind of prescriptive or emotive meaning.

It may be objected to these remarks that the theory of illocutionary forces allows all that has been claimed by those who have proposed a prescriptive or an emotive theory of meaning. If so, there may be no disagreement. I have not denied that the understanding of the illocutionary forces of the various uses of "good," its being employed in statements of praise and advice, and the like, is relevant to grasping the meaning of the term. Nor do I oppose the view that a certain illocutionary force is central to "good," in the sense that one cannot accept as true the statement that something is good and at the same time dissent from its illocutionary force (assuming this force to obtain in the context). The question is how these facts are to be explained.

Thus the descriptive theory maintains that "good" is characteristically used with the force of a recommendation or advice, and the like, precisely because of its descriptive sense as given by the definition. The descriptive meaning of "good" is not simply a family of lists of properties, a list for each kind of thing according to convention or preference. Rather in the way that the definition explains, these lists are formed in the light of what it is rational to want in objects of various kinds. Therefore understanding why the word "good" (and its relatives) is employed in these speech acts is part of understanding this constant sense. Similarly, certain illocutionary forces are central to "good" as a result of its descriptive meaning, just as the force of factual narration belongs to some utterances in virtue of their descriptive meaning. For if we assent to the statement that something is best for us when it is offered as advice, say, we will indeed accept this advice and act upon it if we are rational. The dispute, if there is one, is not about these recognized facts but concerns the place of the descrip-

<sup>9.</sup> For these and other points, see J. O. Urmson, *The Emotive Theory of Ethics* (London, Hutchinson University Library, 1968), pp. 136–145.

tive meaning of "good" in explaining them. The descriptive theory holds that conjoined to a general theory of speech acts the definition of "good" yields an adequate account of these facts. There is no occasion to introduce a distinct kind of meaning.

#### 63. THE DEFINITION OF GOOD FOR PLANS OF LIFE

To this point I have discussed only the first stages of the definition of good in which no questions are raised about the rationality of the ends taken as given. A thing's being a good X for K is treated as equivalent to its having the properties which it is rational for K to want in an X in view of his interests and aims. Yet we often assess the rationality of a person's desires, and the definition must be extended to cover this fundamental case if it is to serve the purposes of the theory of justice. Now the basic idea at the third stage is to apply the definition of good to plans of life. The rational plan for a person determines his good. Here I adapt Royce's thought that a person may be regarded as a human life lived according to a plan. For Royce an individual says who he is by describing his purposes and causes, what he intends to do in his life.10 If this plan is a rational one, then I shall say that the person's conception of his good is likewise rational. In his case the real and the apparent good coincide. Similarly his interests and aims are rational, and it is appropriate to take them as stopping points in making judgments that correspond to the first two stages of the definition. These suggestions are quite straightforward but unfortunately setting out the details is somewhat tedious. In order to expedite matters I shall start off with a pair of definitions and then explain and comment on them over the next several sections.

These definitions read as follows: first, a person's plan of life is rational if, and only if, (1) it is one of the plans that is consistent with the principles of rational choice when these are applied to all the relevant

10. See *The Philosophy of Loyalty,* lect. IV, sec. IV. Royce uses the notion of a plan to characterize the coherent, systematic purposes of the individual, what makes him a conscious, unified moral person. In this Royce is typical of the philosophical usage found in many of the writers cited in §61, note 2, Dewey and Perry, for example. And I shall do the same. The term is given no technical sense, nor are the structures of plans invoked to get other than obvious common sense results. These are matters I do not investigate. For a discussion of plans, see G. A. Miller, Eugene Galanter, and K. H. Pribram, *Plans and the Structure of Behavior* (New York, Henry Holt, 1960); and also Galanter's *Textbook of Elementary Psychology* (San Francisco, Holden-Day, 1966), ch. IX. The notion of a plan may prove useful in characterizing intentional action. See, for example, Alvin Goldman, *A Theory of Action* (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice-Hall, 1970), pp. 56–73, 76–80; but I do not consider this question.

features of his situation, and (2) it is that plan among those meeting this condition which would be chosen by him with full deliberative rationality, that is, with full awareness of the relevant facts and after a careful consideration of the consequences.11 (The notion of deliberative rationality is discussed in the next section.) Secondly, a person's interests and aims are rational if, and only if, they are to be encouraged and provided for by the plan that is rational for him. Note that in the first of these definitions I have implied that a rational plan is presumably but one of many possible plans that are consistent with the principles of rational choice. The reason for this complication is that these principles do not single out one plan as the best. We have instead a maximal class of plans: each member of this class is superior to all plans not included in it, but given any two plans in the class, neither is superior or inferior to the other. Thus to identify a person's rational plan, I suppose that it is that plan belonging to the maximal class which he would choose with full deliberative rationality. We criticize someone's plan, then, by showing either that it violates the principles of rational choice, or that it is not the plan that he would pursue were he to assess his prospects with care in the light of a full knowledge of his situation.

Before illustrating the principles of rational choice, I should say a few things about the rather complex notion of a rational plan. It is fundamental for the definition of good, since a rational plan of life establishes the basic point of view from which all judgments of value relating to a particular person are to be made and finally rendered consistent. Indeed, with certain qualifications (§83) we can think of a person as being happy when he is in the way of a successful execution (more or less) of a rational plan of life drawn up under (more or less) favorable conditions, and he is reasonably confident that his plan can be carried through. Someone is happy when his plans are going well, his more important aspirations being fulfilled, and he feels sure that his good fortune will endure. Since plans which it is rational to adopt vary from person to person depending upon their endowments and circumstances, and the like, different individuals find their happiness in doing different things. The gloss concerning favorable circumstances is necessary because even a rational arrangement of one's activities can be a matter of accepting the lesser evil if natural conditions are harsh and the demands of other men oppressive.

<sup>11.</sup> For simplicity I assume that there is one and only one plan that would be chosen, and not several (or many) between which the agent would be indifferent, or whatever. Thus I speak throughout of the plan that would be adopted with deliberative rationality.

The achievement of happiness in the larger sense of a happy life, or of a happy period of one's life, always presumes a degree of good fortune.

Several further points about long-term plans should be mentioned. The first relates to their time structure. A plan will, to be sure, make some provision for even the most distant future and for our death, but it becomes relatively less specific for later periods. Certain broad contingencies are insured against and general means provided for, but the details are filled in gradually as more information becomes available and our wants and needs are known with greater accuracy. Indeed, one principle of rational choice is that of postponement: if in the future we may want to do one of several things but are unsure which, then, other things equal, we are to plan now so that these alternatives are both kept open. We must not imagine that a rational plan is a detailed blueprint for action stretching over the whole course of life. It consists of a hierarchy of plans, the more specific subplans being filled in at the appropriate time.

The second point is connected with the first. The structure of a plan not only reflects the lack of specific information but it also mirrors a hierarchy of desires proceeding in similar fashion from the more to the less general. The main features of a plan encourage and secure the fulfillment of the more permanent and general aims. A rational plan must, for example, allow for the primary goods, since otherwise no plan can succeed; but the particular form that the corresponding desires will take is usually unknown in advance and can wait for the occasion. Thus while we know that over any extended period of time we shall always have desires for food and drink, it is not until the moment comes that we decide to have a meal consisting of this or that course. These decisions depend on the choices available, on the menu that the situation allows.

Thus planning is in part scheduling.12 We try to organize our activities into a temporal sequence in which each is carried on for a certain length of time. In this way a family of interrelated desires can be satisfied in an effective and harmonious manner. The basic resources of time and energy are allotted to activities in accordance with the intensity of the wants that they answer to and the contribution that they are likely to make to the fulfillment of other ends, The aim of deliberation is to find that plan which best organizes our activities and influences the formation of our subsequent wants so that our aims and interests can be fruitfully combined into one scheme of conduct. Desires that tend to interfere with

<sup>12.</sup> See J. D. Mabbott, "Reason and Desire," *Philosophy,* vol. 28 (1953), for a discussion of this and other points to which I am indebted.

other ends, or which undermine the capacity for other activities, are weeded out; whereas those that are enjoyable in themselves and support other aims as well are encouraged. A plan, then, is made up of subplans suitably arranged in a hierarchy, the broad features of the plan allowing for the more permanent aims and interests that complement one another. Since only the outlines of these aims and interests can be foreseen, the operative parts of the subplans that provide for them are finally decided upon independently as we go along. Revisions and changes at the lower levels do not usually reverberate through the entire structure. If this conception of plans is sound, we should expect that the good things in life are, roughly speaking, those activities and relationships which have a major place in rational plans. And primary goods should turn out to be those things which are generally necessary for carrying out such plans successfully whatever the particular nature of the plan and of its final ends.

These remarks are unhappily too brief. But they are intended only to prevent the more obvious misunderstandings of the notion of a rational plan, and to indicate the place of this notion in a theory of the good. I must now try to convey what is meant by the principles of rational choice. These principles are to be given by enumeration so that eventually they replace the concept of rationality. The relevant features of a person's situation are identified by these principles and the general conditions of human life to which plans must be adjusted. At this point I shall mention those aspects of rationality that are most familiar and seem least in dispute. And for the moment I shall assume that the choice situation relates to the short term. The question is how to fill in the more or less final details of a subplan to be executed over a relatively brief period of time, as when we make plans for a holiday. The larger system of desires may not be significantly affected, although of course some desires will be satisfied in this interval and others will not.

Now for short-term questions anyway, certain principles seem perfectly straightforward and not in dispute. The first of these is that of effective means. Suppose that there is a particular objective that is wanted, and that all the alternatives are means to achieve it, while they are in other respects neutral. The principle holds that we are to adopt that alternative which realizes the end in the best way. More fully: given the objective, one is to achieve it with the least expenditure of means (whatever they are); or given the means, one is to fulfill the objective to the fullest possible extent. This principle is perhaps the most natural criterion of rational choice. Indeed, as we shall note later, there is some tendency to suppose that deliberation must always take this form, being regulated ultimately by a single final end (§83). Otherwise it is thought that there is no rational way to balance a plurality of aims against one another. But this question I leave aside for the present.

The second principle of rational choice is that one (short-term) plan is to be preferred to another if its execution would achieve all of the desired aims of the other plan and one or more further aims in addition. Perry refers to this criterion as the principle of inclusiveness and I shall do the same. Thus we are to follow the more inclusive plan if such a plan exists. To illustrate, suppose that we are planning a trip and we have to decide whether to go to Rome or Paris. It seems impossible to visit both. If on reflection it is clear that we can do everything in Paris that we want to do in Rome, and some other things as well, then we should go to Paris. Adopting this plan will realize a larger set of ends and nothing is left undone that might have been realized by the other plan. Often, however, neither plan is more inclusive than the other; each may achieve an aim which the other does not. We must invoke some other principle to make up our minds, or else subject our aims to further analysis (§83).

A third principle we may call that of the greater likelihood. Suppose that the aims which may be achieved by two plans are roughly the same. Then it may happen that some objectives have a greater chance of being realized by one plan than the other, yet at the same time none of the remaining aims are less likely to be attained. For example, although one can perhaps do everything one wants to do in both Rome and Paris, some of the things one wishes to do seem more likely to meet with success in Paris, and for the rest it is roughly the same. If so, the principle holds that one should go to Paris. A greater likelihood of success favors a plan just as the more inclusive end does. When these principles work together the choice is as obvious as can be. Suppose that we prefer a Titian to a Tintoretto, and that the first of two lottery tickets gives the larger chance to Titian while the second assigns it to the Tintoretto. Then one must prefer the first ticket.

So far we have been considering the application of the principles of rational choice to the short-term case. I now wish to examine the other extreme in which one has to adopt a long-term plan, even a plan of life, as when we have to choose a profession or occupation. It may be thought that having to make such a decision is a task imposed only by a particular form of culture. In another society this choice might not arise. But in fact the question of what to do with our life is always there, although some

<sup>13.</sup> See General Theory of Value (New York, Longmans, Green, 1926), pp. 645-649.

societies force it upon us more obviously than others and at a different time of life. The limit decision to have no plan at all, to let things come as they may, is still theoretically a plan that may or may not be rational. Accepting the idea of a long-term plan, then, it seems clear that such a scheme is to be assessed by what it will probably lead to in each future period of time. The principle of inclusiveness in this case, therefore, runs as follows: one long-term plan is better than another for any given period (or number of periods) if it allows for the encouragement and satisfaction of all the aims and interests of the other plan and for the encouragement and satisfaction of some further aim or interest in addition. The more inclusive plan, if there is one, is to be preferred: it comprehends all the ends of the first plan and at least one other end as well. If this principle is combined with that of effective means, then together they define rationality as preferring, other things equal, the greater means for realizing our aims, and the development of wider and more varied interests assuming that these aspirations can be carried through. The principle of greater likelihood supports this preference even in situations when we cannot be sure that the larger aims can be executed, provided that the chances of execution are as great as with the less comprehensive plan.

The application of the principles of effective means and the greater likelihood to the long-term case seems sound enough. But the use of the principle of inclusiveness may seem problematical. With a fixed system of ends in the short run, we assume that we already have our desires and given this fact we consider how best to satisfy them. But in long-term choice, although we do not yet have the desires which various plans will encourage, we are nevertheless directed to adopt that plan which will develop the more comprehensive interests on the assumption that these further aims can be realized. Now a person may say that since he does not have the more inclusive interests, he is not missing anything in not deciding to encourage and to satisfy them. He may hold that the possible satisfaction of desires that he can arrange never to have is an irrelevant consideration. Of course, he might also contend that the more inclusive system of interests subjects him to a greater risk of dissatisfaction; but this objection is excluded since the principle assumes that the larger pattern of ends is equally likely to be attained.

There are two considerations that seem to favor the principle of inclusiveness in the long-term case. First of all, assuming that how happy a person is depends in part upon the proportion of his aims that are achieved, the extent to which his plans are carried through, it follows that pursuing the principle of inclusiveness tends to raise this proportion and thereby enhance a person's happiness. This effect is absent only in the case where all of the aims of the less inclusive plan are already safely provided for. The other consideration is that, in accordance with the Aristotelian Principle (explained below in §65), I assume that human beings have a higher-order desire to follow the principle of inclusiveness. They prefer the more comprehensive long-term plan because its execution presumably involves a more complex combination of abilities. The Aristotelian Principle states that, other things equal, human beings enjoy the exercise of their realized capacities (their innate or trained abilities), and that this enjoyment increases the more the capacity is realized, or the greater its complexity. A person takes pleasure in doing something as he becomes more proficient at it, and of two activities which he performs equally well, he prefers the one that calls upon the greater number of more subtle and intricate discriminations. Thus the desire to carry out the larger pattern of ends which brings into play the more finely developed talents is an aspect of the Aristotelian Principle. And this desire, along with the higher-order desires to act upon other principles of rational choice, is one of the regulative ends that moves us to engage in rational deliberation and to follow its outcome.

Many things in these remarks call for further explanation. It is clear, for example, that these three principles are not in general sufficient to rank the plans open to us. Means may not be neutral, inclusive plans may not exist, the aims achieved may not be sufficiently similar, and so on. To apply these principles we view our aims as we are inclined to describe them, and more or less count the number realized by this or that plan, or estimate the likelihood of success. For this reason I shall refer to these criteria as counting principles. They do not require a further analysis or alteration of our desires, nor a judgment concerning the relative intensity of our wants. These matters I put aside for the discussion of deliberative rationality. It seems best to conclude this preliminary account by noting what seems to be reasonably clear: namely that we can choose between rational plans of life. And this means that we can choose now which desires we shall have at a later time.

One might suppose at first that this is not possible. We sometimes think that our major desires at least are fixed and that we deliberate solely about the means to satisfy them. Of course, it is obvious that deliberation leads us to have some desires that we did not have before, for example, the desire to avail ourselves of certain means that we have on reflection come to see as useful for our purposes. Furthermore, it is clear that taking thought may lead us to make a general desire more specific, as when a desire for music becomes a desire to hear a particular work. But let us suppose that, except for these sorts of exceptions, we do not choose now what to desire now. Nevertheless, we can certainly decide now to do something that we know will affect the desires that we shall have in the future. At any given time rational persons decide between plans of action in view of their situation and beliefs, all in conjunction with their present major desires and the principles of rational choice. Thus we choose between future desires in the light of our existing desires, including among these the desire to act on rational principles. When an individual decides what to be, what occupation or profession to enter, say, he adopts a particular plan of life. In time his choice will lead him to acquire a definite pattern of wants and aspirations (or the lack thereof), some aspects of which are peculiar to him while others are typical of his chosen occupation or way of life. These considerations appear evident enough, and simply parallel in the case of the individual the deep effects that a choice of a conception of justice is bound to have upon the kinds of aims and interests encouraged by the basic structure of society. Convictions about what sort of person to be are similarly involved in the acceptance of principles of justice.

#### 64. DELIBERATIVE RATIONALITY

I have already noted that the simpler principles of rational choice (the counting principles) do not suffice to order plans. Sometimes they do not apply, since there may be no inclusive plan, say, or else the means are not neutral. Or it often happens that we are left with a maximal class. In these cases further rational criteria may of course be invoked, and some of these I shall discuss below. But I shall suppose that while rational principles can focus our judgments and set up guidelines for reflection, we must finally choose for ourselves in the sense that the choice often rests on our direct self-knowledge not only of what things we want but also of how much we want them. Sometimes there is no way to avoid having to assess the relative intensity of our desires. Rational principles can help us to do this, but they cannot always determine these estimates in a routine fashion. To be sure, there is one formal principle that seems to provide a general answer. This is the principle to adopt that plan which maximizes the expected net balance of satisfaction. Or to express the criterion less hedonistically, if more loosely, one is directed to take that course most likely to realize one's most important aims. But this principle also fails to provide us with an explicit procedure for making up our minds. It is clearly left to the agent himself to decide what it is that he most wants and to judge the comparative importance of his several ends.

At this point I introduce the notion of deliberative rationality following an idea of Sidgwick's. He characterizes a person's future good on the whole as what he would now desire and seek if the consequences of all the various courses of conduct open to him were, at the present point of time, accurately foreseen by him and adequately realized in imagination. An individual's good is the hypothetical composition of impulsive forces that results from deliberative reflection meeting certain conditions.14 Adjusting Sidgwick's notion to the choice of plans, we can say that the rational plan for a person is the one (among those consistent with the counting principles and other principles of rational choice once these are established) which he would choose with deliberative rationality. It is the plan that would be decided upon as the outcome of careful reflection in which the agent reviewed, in the light of all the relevant facts, what it would be like to carry out these plans and thereby ascertained the course of action that would best realize his more fundamental desires.

In this definition of deliberative rationality it is assumed that there are no errors of calculation or reasoning, and that the facts are correctly assessed. I suppose also that the agent is under no misconceptions as to what he really wants. In most cases anyway, when he achieves his aim, he does not find that he no longer wants it and wishes that he had done something else instead. Moreover, the agent's knowledge of his situation and the consequences of carrying out each plan is presumed to be accurate and complete. No relevant circumstances are left out of account. Thus the best plan for an individual is the one that he would adopt if he possessed full information. It is the objectively rational plan for him and determines his real good. As things are, of course, our knowledge of what will happen if we follow this or that plan is usually incomplete. Often we do not know what is the rational plan for us; the most that we can have is a reasonable belief as to where our good lies, and sometimes we can only conjecture. But if the agent does the best that a rational person can do with the information available to him, then the plan he follows is a subjectively rational plan. His choice may be an unhappy one, but if so it is because his beliefs are understandably mistaken or his knowledge insufficient, and not because he drew hasty and fallacious inferences or was confused as to what he really wanted. In this case a

<sup>14.</sup> See *The Methods of Ethics,* 7th ed. (London, Macmillan, 1907), pp. 111f.

person is not to be faulted for any discrepancy between his apparent and his real good.

The notion of deliberative rationality is obviously highly complex, combining many elements. I shall not attempt to enumerate here all the ways in which the process of reflection may go wrong. One could if necessary classify the kinds of mistakes that can be made, the sorts of tests that the agent might apply to see if he has adequate knowledge, and so on. It should be noted, however, that a rational person will not usually continue to deliberate until he has found the best plan open to him. Often he will be content if he forms a satisfactory plan (or subplan), that is, one that meets various minimum conditions.15 Rational deliberation is itself an activity like any other, and the extent to which one should engage in it is subject to rational decision. The formal rule is that we should deliberate up to the point where the likely benefits from improving our plan are just worth the time and effort of reflection. Once we take the costs of deliberation into account, it is unreasonable to worry about finding the best plan, the one that we would choose had we complete information. It is perfectly rational to follow a satisfactory plan when the prospective returns from further calculation and additional knowledge do not outweigh the trouble. There is even nothing irrational in an aversion to deliberation itself provided that one is prepared to accept the consequences. Goodness as rationality does not attribute any special value to the process of deciding. The importance to the agent of careful reflection will presumably vary from one individual to another. Nevertheless, a person is being irrational if his unwillingness to think about what is the best (or a satisfactory) thing to do leads him into misadventures that on consideration he would concede that he should have taken thought to avoid.

In this account of deliberative rationality I have assumed a certain competence on the part of the person deciding: he knows the general features of his wants and ends both present and future, and he is able to estimate the relative intensity of his desires, and to decide if necessary what he really wants. Moreover, he can envisage the alternatives open to him and establish a coherent ordering of them: given any two plans he can work out which one he prefers or whether he is indifferent between them, and these preferences are transitive. Once a plan is settled upon, he is able to adhere to it and he can resist present temptations and distractions that interfere with its execution. These assumptions accord with the

<sup>15.</sup> On this point, see H. A. Simon, "A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice," *Quarterly Journal of Economics,* vol. 69 (1955).

familiar notion of rationality that I have used all along (§25). I shall not examine here these aspects of being rational. It seems more useful to mention briefly some ways of criticizing our ends which may often help us to estimate the relative intensity of our desires. Keeping in mind that our overall aim is to carry out a rational plan (or subplan), it is clear that some features of desires make doing this impossible. For example, we cannot realize ends the descriptions of which are meaningless, or contradict well-established truths. Since is a transcendental number, it would be pointless to try to prove that it is an algebraic number. To be sure, a mathematician in attempting to prove this proposition might discover by the way many important facts, and this achievement might redeem his efforts. But insofar as his end was to prove a falsehood, his plan would be open to criticism; and once he became aware of this, he would no longer have this aim. The same thing holds for desires that depend upon our having incorrect beliefs. It is not excluded that mistaken opinions may have a beneficial effect by enabling us to proceed with our plans, being so to speak useful illusions. Nevertheless, the desires that these beliefs support are irrational to the degree that the falsehood of these beliefs makes it impossible to execute the plan, or prevents superior plans from being adopted. (I should observe here that in the thin theory the value of knowing the facts is derived from their relation to the successful execution of rational plans. So far at least there are no grounds for attributing intrinsic value to having true beliefs.)

We may also investigate the circumstances under which we have acquired our desires and conclude that some of our aims are in various respects out of line.16 Thus a desire may spring from excessive generalization, or arise from more or less accidental associations. This is especially likely to be so in the case of aversions developed when we are younger and do not possess enough experience and maturity to make the necessary corrections. Other wants may be inordinate, having acquired their peculiar urgency as an overreaction to a prior period of severe deprivation or anxiety. The study of these processes and their disturbing influence on the normal development of our system of desires is not our concern here. They do however suggest certain critical reflections that are important devices of deliberation. Awareness of the genesis of our wants can often make it perfectly clear to us that we really do desire certain things more than others. As some aims seem less important in the face of critical scrutiny, or even lose their appeal entirely, others may assume

<sup>16.</sup> For the remarks in this paragraph, I am indebted to R. B. Brandt.

an assured prominence that provides sufficient grounds for choice. Of course, it is conceivable that despite the unfortunate conditions under which some of our desires and aversions have developed, they may still fit into and even greatly enhance the fulfillment of rational plans. If so, they turn out to be perfectly rational after all.

Finally, there are certain time-related principles that also can be used to select among plans. The principle of postponement I have already mentioned. It holds that, other things equal, rational plans try to keep our hands free until we have a clear view of the relevant facts. And the grounds for rejecting pure time preference we have also considered (§45). We are to see our life as one whole, the activities of one rational subject spread out in time. Mere temporal position, or distance from the present, is not a reason for favoring one moment over another. Future aims may not be discounted solely in virtue of being future, although we may, of course, ascribe less weight to them if there are reasons for thinking that, given their relation to other things, their fulfillment is less probable. The intrinsic importance that we assign to different parts of our life should be the same at every moment of time. These values should depend upon the whole plan itself as far as we can determine it and should not be affected by the contingencies of our present perspective.

Two other principles apply to the overall shape of plans through time. One of these is that of continuity.17 It reminds us that since a plan is a scheduled sequence of activities, earlier and later activities are bound to affect one another. The whole plan has a certain unity, a dominant theme. There is not, so to speak, a separate utility function for each period. Not only must effects between periods be taken into account, but substantial swings up and down are presumably to be avoided. A second closely related principle holds that we are to consider the advantages of rising, or at least of not significantly declining, expectations. There are various stages of life, each ideally with its own characteristic tasks and enjoyments. Other things equal, we should arrange things at the earlier stages so as to permit a happy life at the later ones. It would seem that for the most part rising expectations over time are to be preferred. If the value of an activity is assessed relative to its own period, assuming that this is possible, we might try to explain this preference by the relatively greater intensity of the pleasures of anticipation over those of memory. Even though the total sum of enjoyment is the same when enjoyments are

<sup>17.</sup> This name is taken from Jan Tinbergen, "Optimum Savings and Utility Maximization over Time," *Econometrica,* vol. 28 (1960).

estimated locally, increasing expectations provide a measure of contentment that makes the difference. But even leaving this element aside, the rising or at least the nondeclining plan appears preferable since later activities can often incorporate and bind together the results and enjoyments of an entire life into one coherent structure as those of a declining plan cannot.

In these remarks about the devices of deliberation and time-related principles I have tried to fill in Sidgwick's notion of a person's good. In brief, our good is determined by the plan of life that we would adopt with full deliberative rationality if the future were accurately foreseen and adequately realized in the imagination. The matters we have just discussed are connected with being rational in this sense. Here it is worth stressing that a rational plan is one that would be selected if certain conditions were fulfilled. The criterion of the good is hypothetical in a way similar to the criterion of justice. When the question arises as to whether doing something accords with our good, the answer depends upon how well it fits the plan that would be chosen with deliberative rationality.

Now one feature of a rational plan is that in carrying it out the individual does not change his mind and wish that he had done something else instead. A rational person does not come to feel an aversion for the foreseen consequences so great that he regrets following the plan he has adopted. The absence of this sort of regret is not however sufficient to insure that a plan is rational. There may be another plan open to us such that were we to consider it we would find it much better. Nevertheless, if our information is accurate and our understanding of the consequences complete in relevant respects, we do not regret following a rational plan, even if it is not a good one judged absolutely. In this instance the plan is objectively rational. We may, of course, regret something else, for example, that we have to live under such unfortunate circumstances that a happy life is impossible. Conceivably we may wish that we had never been born. But we do not regret that, having been born, we followed the best plan as bad as it may be when judged by some ideal standard. A rational person may regret his pursuing a subjectively rational plan, but not because he thinks his choice is in any way open to criticism. For he does what seems best at the time, and if his beliefs later prove to be mistaken with untoward results, it is through no fault of his own. There is no cause for self-reproach. There was no way of knowing which was the best or even a better plan.

Putting these reflections together, we have the guiding principle that a

rational individual is always to act so that he need never blame himself no matter how his plans finally work out. Viewing himself as one continuing being over time, he can say that at each moment of his life he has done what the balance of reasons required, or at least permitted.18 Therefore any risks he assumes must be worthwhile, so that should the worst happen that he had any reason to foresee, he can still affirm that what he did was above criticism. He does not regret his choice, at least not in the sense that he later believes that at the time it would have been more rational to have done otherwise. This principle will not certainly prevent us from taking steps that lead to misadventure. Nothing can protect us from the ambiguities and limitations of our knowledge, or guarantee that we find the best alternative open to us. Acting with deliberative rationality can only insure that our conduct is above reproach, and that we are responsible to ourselves as one person over time. We should indeed be surprised if someone said that he did not care about how he will view his present actions later any more than he cares about the affairs of other people (which is not much, let us suppose). One who rejects equally the claims of his future self and the interests of others is not only irresponsible with respect to them but in regard to his own person as well. He does not see himself as one enduring individual.

Now looked at in this way, the principle of responsibility to self resembles a principle of right: the claims of the self at different times are to be so adjusted that the self at each time can affirm the plan that has been and is being followed. The person at one time, so to speak, must not be able to complain about actions of the person at another time. This principle does not, of course, exclude the willing endurance of hardship and suffering; but it must be presently acceptable in view of the expected or achieved good. From the standpoint of the original position the relevance of responsibility to self seems clear enough. Since the notion of deliberative rationality applies there, it means that the parties cannot agree to a conception of justice if the consequences of applying it may lead to self-reproach should the least happy possibilities be realized. They should strive to be free from such regrets. And the principles of justice as fairness seem to meet this requirement better than other conceptions, as we can see from the earlier discussion of the strains of commitment (§29).

A final observation about goodness as rationality. It may be objected that this conception implies that one should be continually planning and

<sup>18.</sup> For this and other points in this paragraph see Charles Fried, *An Anatomy of Values* (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1970), pp. 158–169, and Thomas Nagel, *The Possibility of Altruism* (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1970), esp. ch. VIII.

calculating. But this interpretation rests upon a misunderstanding. The first aim of the theory is to provide a criterion for the good of the person. This criterion is defined chiefly by reference to the rational plan that would be chosen with full deliberative rationality. The hypothetical nature of the definition must be kept in mind. A happy life is not one taken up with deciding whether to do this or that. From the definition alone very little can be said about the content of a rational plan, or the particular activities that comprise it. It is not inconceivable that an individual, or even a whole society, should achieve happiness moved entirely by spontaneous inclination. With great luck and good fortune some men might by nature just happen to hit upon the way of living that they would adopt with deliberative rationality. For the most part, though, we are not so blessed, and without taking thought and seeing ourselves as one person with a life over time, we shall almost certainly regret our course of action. Even when a person does succeed in relying on his natural impulses without misadventure, we still require a conception of his good in order to assess whether he has really been fortunate or not. He may think so, but he may be deluded; and to settle this matter, we have to examine the hypothetical choices that it would have been rational for him to make, granting due allowance for whatever benefits he may have obtained from not worrying about these things. As I noted before, the value of the activity of deciding is itself subject to rational appraisal. The efforts we should expend making decisions will depend like so much else on circumstances. Goodness as rationality leaves this question to the person and the contingencies of his situation.

#### 65. THE ARISTOTELIAN PRINCIPLE

The definition of the good is purely formal. It simply states that a person's good is determined by the rational plan of life that he would choose with deliberative rationality from the maximal class of plans. Although the notion of deliberative rationality and the principles of rational choice rely upon concepts of considerable complexity, we still cannot derive from the definition of rational plans alone what sorts of ends these plans are likely to encourage. In order to draw conclusions about these ends, it is necessary to take note of certain general facts.

First of all, there are the broad features of human desires and needs, their relative urgency and cycles of recurrence, and their phases of development as affected by physiological and other circumstances. Second, plans must fit the requirements of human capacities and abilities, their trends of maturation and growth, and how they are best trained and educated for this or that purpose. Moreover, I shall postulate a basic principle of motivation which I shall refer to as the Aristotelian Principle. Finally, the general facts of social interdependency must be reckoned with. The basic structure of society is bound to encourage and support certain kinds of plans more than others by rewarding its members for contributing to the common good in ways consistent with justice. Taking account of these contingencies narrows down the alternative plans so that the problem of decision becomes, in some cases anyway, reasonably definite. To be sure, as we shall see, a certain arbitrariness still remains, but the priority of right limits it in such a way that it is no longer a problem from the standpoint of justice (§68).

The general facts about human needs and abilities are perhaps clear enough and I shall assume that common sense knowledge suffices for our purposes here. Before taking up the Aristotelian Principle, however, I should comment briefly on the human goods (as I shall call them) and the constraints of justice. Given the definition of a rational plan, we may think of these goods as those activities and ends that have the features whatever they are that suit them for an important if not a central place in our life.19 Since in the full theory rational plans must be consistent with the principles of justice, the human goods are similarly constrained. Thus the familiar values of personal affection and friendship, meaningful work and social cooperation, the pursuit of knowledge and the fashioning and contemplation of beautiful objects, are not only prominent in our rational plans but they can for the most part be advanced in a manner which justice permits. Admittedly to attain and to preserve these values, we are often tempted to act unjustly; but achieving these ends involves no inherent injustice. In contrast with the desire to cheat and to degrade others, doing something unjust is not included in the description of the human goods (§66).

The social interdependency of these values is shown in the fact that not only are they good for those who enjoy them but they are likely to enhance the good of others. In achieving these ends we generally contribute to the rational plans of our associates. In this sense, they are complementary goods, and this accounts for their being singled out for special commendation. For to commend something is to praise it, to recount the

<sup>19.</sup> For the explanation of these goods I have drawn from C. A. Campbell, "Moral and Non-Moral Values," *Mind,* vol. 44 (1935); see pp. 279–291.

properties that make it good (rational to want) with emphasis and expressions of approval. These facts of interdependency are further reasons for including the recognized values in long-term plans. For assuming that we desire the respect and good will of other persons, or at least to avoid their hostility and contempt, those plans of life will tend to be preferable which further their aims as well as our own.

Turning now to our present topic, it will be recalled that the Aristotelian Principle runs as follows: other things equal, human beings enjoy the exercise of their realized capacities (their innate or trained abilities), and this enjoyment increases the more the capacity is realized, or the greater its complexity.20 The intuitive idea here is that human beings take more pleasure in doing something as they become more proficient at it, and of two activities they do equally well, they prefer the one calling on a larger repertoire of more intricate and subtle discriminations. For example, chess is a more complicated and subtle game than checkers, and algebra is more intricate than elementary arithmetic. Thus the principle says that someone who can do both generally prefers playing chess to playing checkers, and that he would rather study algebra than arithmetic. We need not explain here why the Aristotelian Principle is true. Presumably complex activities are more enjoyable because they satisfy the desire for variety and novelty of experience, and leave room for feats of ingenuity and invention. They also evoke the pleasures of anticipation and surprise, and often the overall form of the activity, its structural develop-

20. The name "Aristotelian Principle" seems to me appropriate in view of what Aristotle says about the relations between happiness, activity, and enjoyment in the *Nicomachean Ethics,* bk. VII, chs. 11–14, and bk. X, chs. 1–5. Yet since he does not state such a principle explicitly, and some of it is at best only implied, I have not called it "Aristotle's Principle." Nevertheless, Aristotle certainly affirms two points that the principle conveys: (1) that enjoyment and pleasure are not always by any means the result of returning to a healthy or normal state, or of making up deficiencies; rather many kinds of pleasure and enjoyment arise when we exercise our faculties; and (2) that the exercise of our natural powers is a leading human good. Further, (3) the idea that the more enjoyable activities and the more desirable and enduring pleasures spring from the exercise of greater abilities involving more complex discriminations is not only compatible with Aristotle's conception of the natural order, but something like it usually fits the judgments of value he makes, even when it does not express his reasons. For a discussion of Aristotle's account of enjoyment and pleasure, see W. F. R. Hardie, *Aristotle's Ethical Theory* (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1968), ch. XIV. The interpretation of Aristotle's doctrine given by G. C. Field, *Moral Theory* (London, Methuen, 1932), pp. 76–78, strongly suggests what I have called the Aristotelian Principle. Mill comes very close to stating it in *Utilitarianism.* ch. II, pars. 4–8. Important here is the concept of effectance motivation introduced by R. W. White, "Ego and Reality in Psychoanalytic Theory," *Psychological Issues,* vol. III, 1963), ch. III, upon which I have relied. See also pp. 173–175, 180f. I am indebted to J. M. Cooper for discussion on the interpretation of this principle and the propriety of its name.

ment, is fascinating and beautiful. Moreover, simpler activities exclude the possibility of individual style and personal expression which complex activities permit or even require, for how could everyone do them in the same way? That we should follow our natural bent and the lessons of our past experience seems inevitable if we are to find our way at all. Each of these features is well illustrated by chess, even to the point where grand masters have their characteristic style of play. Whether these considerations are explanations of the Aristotelian Principle or elaboration of its meaning, I shall leave aside. I believe that nothing essential for the theory of the good depends upon this question.

It is evident that the Aristotelian Principle contains a variant of the principle of inclusiveness. Or at least the clearest cases of greater complexity are those in which one of the activities to be compared includes all the skills and discriminations of the other activity and some further ones in addition. Once again, we can establish but a partial order, since each of several activities may require abilities not used in the others. Such an ordering is the best that we can have until we possess some relatively precise theory and measure of complexity that enables us to analyze and compare seemingly disparate activities. I shall not, however, discuss this problem here, but assume instead that our intuitive notion of complexity will suffice for our purposes.

The Aristotelian Principle is a principle of motivation. It accounts for many of our major desires, and explains why we prefer to do some things and not others by constantly exerting an influence over the flow of our activity. Moreover, it expresses a psychological law governing changes in the pattern of our desires. Thus the principle implies that as a person's capacities increase over time (brought about by physiological and biological maturation, for example, the development of the nervous system in a young child), and as he trains these capacities and learns how to exercise them, he will in due course come to prefer the more complex activities that he can now engage in which call upon his newly realized abilities. The simpler things he enjoyed before are no longer sufficiently interesting or attractive. If we ask why we are willing to undergo the stresses of practice and learning, the reason may be (if we leave out of account external rewards and penalties) that having had some success at learning things in the past, and experiencing the present enjoyments of the activity, we are led to expect even greater satisfaction once we acquire a greater repertoire of skills. There is also a companion effect to the Aristotelian Principle. As we witness the exercise of well-trained abilities by others, these displays are enjoyed by us and arouse a desire that we should be able to do the same things ourselves. We want to be like those persons who can exercise the abilities that we find latent in our nature.

Thus it would appear that how much we learn and how far we educate our innate capacities depends upon how great these capacities are and how difficult is the effort of realizing them. There is a race, so to speak, between the increasing satisfaction of exercising greater realized ability and the increasing strains of learning as the activity becomes more strenuous and difficult. Assuming that natural talents have an upper bound, whereas the hardships of training can be made more severe without limit, there must be some level of achieved ability beyond which the gains from a further increase in this level are just offset by the burdens of the further practice and study necessary to bring it about and to maintain it. Equilibrium is reached when these two forces balance one another, and at this point the effort to achieve greater realized capacity ceases. It follows that if the pleasures of the activity increase too slowly with rising ability (an index let us suppose of a lower level of innate ability), then the correspondingly greater efforts of learning will lead us to give up sooner. In this case we will never engage in certain more complex activities nor acquire the desires evoked by taking part in them.

Now accepting the Aristotelian Principle as a natural fact, it will generally be rational, in view of the other assumptions, to realize and train mature capacities. Maximal or satisfactory plans are almost certainly plans that provide for doing this in significant measure. Not only is there a tendency in this direction postulated by the Aristotelian Principle, but the plain facts of social interdependency and the nature of our interests more narrowly construed incline us in the same way. A rational plan constrained as always by the principles of right—allows a person to flourish, so far as circumstances permit, and to exercise his realized abilities as much as he can. Moreover, his fellow associates are likely to support these activities as promoting the common interest and also to take pleasure in them as displays of human excellence. To the degree, then, that the esteem and admiration of others is desired, the activities favored by the Aristotelian Principle are good for other persons as well.

There are several points to keep in mind in order to prevent misunderstandings of this principle. For one thing, it formulates a tendency and not an invariable pattern of choice, and like all tendencies it may be overridden. Countervailing inclinations can inhibit the development of realized capacity and the preference for more complex activities. Various hazards and risks, both psychological and social, are involved in training and prospective accomplishment, and apprehensions about these may outweigh the original propensity. We must interpret the principle so as to allow for these facts. Yet if it is a useful theoretical notion, the tendency postulated should be relatively strong and not easily counterbalanced. I believe that this is indeed the case, and that in the design of social institutions a large place has to be made for it, otherwise human beings will find their culture and form of life dull and empty. Their vitality and zest will fail as their life becomes a tiresome routine. And this seems borne out by the fact that the forms of life which absorb men's energies, whether they be religious devotions or purely practical matters or even games and pastimes, tend to develop their intricacies and subtleties almost without end. As social practices and cooperative activities are built up through the imagination of many individuals, they increasingly call forth a more complex array of abilities and new ways of doing things. That this process is carried along by the enjoyment of natural and free activity seems to be verified by the spontaneous play of children and animals which shows all the same features.

A further consideration is that the principle does not assert that any particular kind of activity will be preferred. It says only that we prefer, other things equal, activities that depend upon a larger repertoire of realized capacities and that are more complex. More precisely, suppose that we can order a certain number of activities in a chain by the inclusion relation. This means that the nth activity exercises all the skills of the n–1th activity and some further ones in addition. Now there are indefinitely many such chains with no elements in common, let us say; and moreover, numerous chains may start from the same activity representing different ways in which this activity can be built upon and enriched. What the Aristotelian Principle says is that whenever a person engages in an activity belonging to some chain (and perhaps to several chains) he tends to move up the chain. In general, he will prefer doing the nth to doing the n–1th activity; and this tendency will be stronger the more his capacity is yet to be realized and the less onerous he finds the strains of learning and training. Presumably there is a preference for ascending the chain or chains which offer the greatest prospects of exercising the higher abilities with the least stress. The actual course that a person follows, the combination of activities that he finds most appealing, is decided by his inclinations and talents and by his social circumstances, by what his associates appreciate and are likely to encourage. Thus natural assets and social opportunities obviously influence the chains that individuals eventually prefer. By itself the principle simply asserts a propensity to ascend whatever chains are chosen. It does not entail that a rational plan includes any particular aims, nor does it imply any special form of society.

Again, we may suppose, although it is probably not essential, that every activity belongs to some chain. The reason for this is that human ingenuity can and normally will discover for each activity a continuing chain that elicits a growing inventory of skills and discriminations. We stop moving up a chain, however, when going higher will use up resources required for raising or for maintaining the level of a preferred chain. And resources here is to be taken broadly, so that among the most important ones are time and energy. This is the reason why, for example, we are content to lace our shoes or to tie our tie in a straightforward way, and do not ordinarily make complex rituals of these daily actions. There are only so many hours in a day, and this prevents our ascending to the upper limits of our capacity all the chains that are open to us. But then a prisoner in a cell might take time with daily routines and invent ways of doing them that he would not otherwise bother with. The formal criterion is that a rational individual selects a preferred pattern of activities (compatible with the principle of justice) and proceeds along each of its chains up to the point where no further improvement results from any feasible change in the schedule. This overall standard does not, of course, tell us how to decide; rather it emphasizes the limited resources of time and energy, and explains why some activities are slighted in favor of others even though, in the form in which we engage in them, they allow for further elaboration.

Now it may be objected that there is no reason to suppose that the Aristotelian Principle is true. Like the idealist notion of self-realization, to which it bears a certain resemblance, it may have the ring of a philosopher's principle with little to support it. But it seems to be borne out by many facts of everyday life, and by the behavior of children and some of the higher animals. Moreover, it appears to be susceptible to an evolutionary explanation. Natural selection must have favored creatures of whom this principle is true. Aristotle says that men desire to know. Presumably we have acquired this desire by a natural development, and indeed, if the principle is sound, a desire to engage in more complex and demanding activities of any kind as long as they are within our reach.21 Human beings enjoy the greater variety of experience, they take pleasure in the

<sup>21.</sup> See B. G. Campbell, *Human Evolution* (Chicago, Aldine Publishing Co., 1966), pp. 49–53; and W. H. Thorpe, *Science, Man, and Morals* (London, Methuen, 1965), pp. 87–92. For animals see Irenäus Eibl-Eibesfeldt, *Ethology,* trans. Erich Klinghammer (New York, Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1970), pp. 217–248.

novelty and surprises and the occasions for ingenuity and invention that such activities provide. The multiplicity of spontaneous activities is an expression of the delight that we take in imagination and creative fantasy. Thus the Aristotelian Principle characterizes human beings as importantly moved not only by the pressure of bodily needs, but also by the desire to do things enjoyed simply for their own sakes, at least when the urgent and pressing wants are satisfied. The marks of such enjoyed activities are many, varying from the manner and way in which they are done to the persistence with which they are returned to at a later time. Indeed, we do them without the incentive of evident reward, and allowing us to engage in them can itself act often as a reward for doing other things.22 Since the Aristotelian Principle is a feature of human desires as they now exist, rational plans must take it into account. The evolutionary explanation, even if it is correct, is not of course a justification for this aspect of our nature. In fact, the question of justification does not arise. The question is rather: granted that this principle characterizes human nature as we know it, to what extent is it to be encouraged and supported, and how is it to be reckoned with in framing rational plans of life?

The role of the Aristotelian Principle in the theory of the good is that it states a deep psychological fact which, in conjunction with other general facts and the conception of a rational plan, accounts for our considered judgments of value. The things that are commonly thought of as human goods should turn out to be the ends and activities that have a major place in rational plans. The principle is part of the background that regulates these judgments. Provided that it is true, and leads to conclusions matching our convictions about what is good and bad (in reflective equilibrium), it has a proper place in moral theory. Even if this conception should not be true of some persons, the idea of a rational long-term plan still applies. We can work out what is good for them in much the same way as before. Thus imagine someone whose only pleasure is to count blades of grass in various geometrically shaped areas such as park squares and well-trimmed lawns. He is otherwise intelligent and actually possesses unusual skills, since he manages to survive by solving difficult mathematical problems for a fee. The definition of the good forces us to admit that the good for this man is indeed counting blades of grass, or more accurately, his good is determined by a plan that gives an especially prominent place to this activity. Naturally we would be surprised that such a person should exist. Faced with his case, we would try out other

<sup>22.</sup> This seems also to be true of monkeys. See Eibl-Eibesfeldt, ibid., p. 239.

hypotheses. Perhaps he is peculiarly neurotic and in early life acquired an aversion to human fellowship, and so he counts blades of grass to avoid having to deal with other people. But if we allow that his nature is to enjoy this activity and not to enjoy any other, and that there is no feasible way to alter his condition, then surely a rational plan for him will center around this activity. It will be for him the end that regulates the schedule of his actions, and this establishes that it is good for him. I mention this fanciful case only to show that the correctness of the definition of a person's good in terms of the rational plan for him does not require the truth of the Aristotelian Principle. The definition is satisfactory, I believe, even if this principle should prove inaccurate, or fail altogether. But by assuming the principle we seem able to account for what things are recognized as good for human beings taking them as they are. Moreover, since this principle ties in with the primary good of self-respect, it turns out to have a central position in the moral psychology underlying justice as fairness (§67).
