---
images: []
order: 31
title: 68. SEVERAL CONTRASTS BETWEEN THE RIGHT AND THE GOOD
---

In order to bring out the structural features of the contract view, I shall now mention several contrasts between the concepts of the right and the good. Since these concepts enable us to explain moral worth, they are the two fundamental concepts of the theory. The structure of an ethical doctrine depends upon how it relates these two notions and defines their differences. The distinctive features of justice as fairness can be shown by noting these points.

One difference is that whereas the principles of justice (and the principles of right generally) are those that would be chosen in the original position, the principles of rational choice and the criteria of deliberative rationality are not chosen at all. The first task in the theory of justice is to define the initial situation so that the principles that result express the correct conception of justice from a philosophical point of view. This means that the typical features of this situation should represent reasonable constraints on arguments for accepting principles and that the principles agreed to should match our considered convictions of justice in reflective equilibrium. Now, the analogous problem for the theory of the good does not arise. There is, to begin with, no necessity for an agreement upon the principles of rational choice. Since each person is free to plan his life as he pleases (so long as his intentions are consistent with the principles of justice), unanimity concerning the standards of rationality is not required. All the theory of justice assumes is that, in the thin account of the good, the evident criteria of rational choice are sufficient to explain the preference for the primary goods, and that such variations as exist in conceptions of rationality do not affect the principles of justice adopted in the original position.

Nevertheless, I have assumed that human beings do recognize certain principles and that these standards may be taken by enumeration to replace the notion of rationality. We can, if we wish, allow certain variations in the list. Thus there is disagreement as to the best way to deal with uncertainty.28 There is no reason, though, why individuals in making their plans should not be thought of as following their inclinations in this case. Therefore any principle of choice under uncertainty which seems plausible can be added to the list, so long as decisive arguments against it

<sup>28.</sup> See the discussion in R. D. Luce and Howard Raiffa, *Games and Decisions* (New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1957), pp. 278–306.

are not forthcoming. It is only in the thin theory of the good that we have to worry about these matters. Here the notion of rationality must be interpreted so that the general desire for the primary goods can be established and the choice of the principles of justice demonstrated. But even in this case, I have suggested that the conception of justice adopted is insensitive with respect to conflicting interpretations of rationality. But in any event, once the principles of justice are chosen, and we are working within the full theory, there is no need to set up the account of the good so as to force unanimity on all the standards of the rational choice. In fact, it would contradict the freedom of choice that justice as fairness assures to individuals and groups within the framework of just institutions.

A second contrast between the right and the good is that it is, in general, a good thing that individuals' conceptions of their good should differ in significant ways, whereas this is not so for conceptions of right. In a well-ordered society citizens hold the same principles of right and they try to reach the same judgment in particular cases. These principles are to establish a final ordering among the conflicting claims that persons make upon one another and it is essential that this ordering be identifiable from everyone's point of view, however difficult it may be in practice for everyone to accept it. On the other hand, individuals find their good in different ways, and many things may be good for one person that would not be good for another. Moreover, there is no urgency to reach a publicly accepted judgment as to what is the good of particular individuals. The reasons that make such an agreement necessary in questions of justice do not obtain for judgments of value. Even when we take up another's point of view and attempt to estimate what would be to his advantage, we do so as an adviser, so to speak. We try to put ourselves in the other's place, and imagining that we have his aims and wants, we attempt to see things from his standpoint. Cases of paternalism aside, our judgment is offered when it is asked for, but there is no conflict of right if our advice is disputed and our opinion is not acted upon.

In a well-ordered society, then, the plans of life of individuals are different in the sense that these plans give prominence to different aims, and persons are left free to determine their good, the views of others being counted as merely advisory. Now this variety in conceptions of the good is itself a good thing, that is, it is rational for members of a well-ordered society to want their plans to be different. The reasons for this are obvious. Human beings have various talents and abilities the totality of which is unrealizable by any one person or group of persons. Thus we not only benefit from the complementary nature of our developed inclinations but we take pleasure in one another's activities. It is as if others were bringing forth a part of ourselves that we have not been able to cultivate. We have had to devote ourselves to other things, to only a small part of what we might have done (§79). But the situation is quite otherwise with justice: here we require not only common principles but sufficiently similar ways of applying them in particular cases so that a final ordering of conflicting claims can be defined. Judgments of justice are advisory only in special circumstances.

The third difference is that many applications of the principles of justice are restricted by the veil of ignorance, whereas evaluations of a person's good may rely upon a full knowledge of the facts. Thus, as we have seen, not only must the principles of justice be chosen in the absence of certain kinds of particular information, but when these principles are used in designing constitutions and basic social arrangements, and in deciding between laws and policies, we are subject to similar although not as strict limitations. The delegates to a constitutional convention, and ideal legislators and voters, are also required to take up a point of view in which they know only the appropriate general facts. An individual's conception of his good, on the other hand, is to be adjusted from the start to his particular situation. A rational plan of life takes into account our special abilities, interests, and circumstances, and therefore it quite properly depends upon our social position and natural assets. There is no objection to fitting rational plans to these contingencies, since the principles of justice have already been chosen and constrain the content of these plans, the ends that they encourage and the means that they use. But in judgments of justice, it is only at the judicial and administrative stage that all restrictions on information are dropped, and particular cases are to be decided in view of all the relevant facts.

In the light of these contrasts we may further clarify an important difference between the contract doctrine and utilitarianism. Since the principle of utility is to maximize the good understood as the satisfaction of rational desire, we are to take as given existing preferences and the possibilities of their continuation into the future, and then to strive for the greatest net balance of satisfaction. But as we have seen, the determination of rational plans is indeterminate in important ways (§64). The more evident and easily applied principles of rational choice do not specify the best plan; a great deal remains to be decided. This indeterminacy is no difficulty for justice as fairness, since the details of plans do not affect in any way what is right or just. Our way of life, whatever our particular circumstances, must always conform to the principles of justice that are arrived at independently. Thus the arbitrary features of plans of life do not affect these principles, or how the basic structure is to be arranged. The indeterminacy in the notion of rationality does not translate itself into legitimate claims that men can impose on one another. The priority of the right prevents this.

The utilitarian, on the other hand, must concede the theoretical possibility that configurations of preferences allowed by this indeterminacy may lead to injustice as ordinarily understood. For example, assume that the larger part of society has an abhorrence for certain religious or sexual practices, and regards them as an abomination. This feeling is so intense that it is not enough that these practices be kept from the public view; the very thought that these things are going on is enough to arouse the majority to anger and hatred. Even when these attitudes are unsupportable on moral grounds, there appears to be no sure way to exclude them as irrational. Seeking the greatest satisfaction of desire may, then, justify harsh repressive measures against actions that cause no social injury, To defend individual liberty in this case the utilitarian has to show that given the circumstances the real balance of advantages in the long run still lies on the side of freedom; and this argument may or may not be successful.

In justice as fairness, however, this problem never arises. The intense convictions of the majority, if they are indeed mere preferences without any foundation in the principles of justice antecedently established, have no weight to begin with. The satisfaction of these feelings has no value that can be put in the scales against the claims of equal liberty. To have a complaint against the conduct and belief of others we must show that their actions injure us, or that the institutions that authorize what they do treat us unjustly. And this means that we must appeal to the principles that we would acknowledge in the original position. Against these principles neither the intensity of feeling nor its being shared by the majority counts for anything. On the contract view, then, the grounds of liberty are completely separate from existing preferences. Indeed, we may think of the principles of justice as an agreement not to take into account certain feelings when assessing the conduct of others. As I noted before (§50), these points are familiar elements of the classical liberal doctrine. I have mentioned them again in order to show that the indeterminacy in the full theory of the good is no cause for objection. It may leave a person unsettled as to what to do, since it cannot provide him with instructions as to how to decide. But since the aim of justice is not to maximize the fulfillment of rational plans, the content of justice is not in any way affected. Of course, it cannot be denied that prevailing social attitudes tie the statesman's hands. The convictions and passions of the majority may make liberty impossible to maintain. But bowing to these practical necessities is a different thing from accepting the justification that if these feelings are strong enough and outweigh in intensity any feelings that might replace them, they should carry the decision. By contrast, the contract view requires that we move toward just institutions as speedily as the circumstances permit irrespective of existing sentiments. A definite scheme of ideal institutions is embedded in its principles of justice (§41).

It is evident from these contrasts that in justice as fairness the concepts of the right and the good have markedly distinct features. These differences arise from the structure of contract theory and the priority of right and justice that results. I do not suggest, however, that the terms "right" and "good" (and their relatives) are normally used in ways that reflect these distinctions. Although our ordinary speech may tend to support the account of these concepts, this correspondence is not needed for the correctness of the contract doctrine. Rather, two things suffice. First, there is a way of mapping our considered judgments into the theory of justice such that in reflective equilibrium the counterparts of these convictions turn out to be true, to express judgments that we can accept. And second, once we understand the theory, we can acknowledge these interpretations as suitable renderings of what on reflection we now wish to maintain. Even though we would not normally use these replacements, perhaps because they are too cumbersome, or would be misunderstood, or whatever, we are prepared to grant that they cover in substance all that wants to be said. Certainly these substitutes may not mean the same as the ordinary judgments with which they are paired. How far this is the case is a question that I shall not examine. Moreover, the replacements may indicate a shift more or less drastic from our initial moral judgments as they existed prior to philosophical reflection. Some changes anyway are bound to have taken place as philosophical criticism and construction lead us to revise and extend our views. But what counts is whether the conception of justice as fairness, better than any other theory presently known to us, turns out to lead to true interpretations of our considered judgments, and provides a mode of expression for what we want to affirm.
