---
images: []
order: 32
title: Preamble
---

Having presented an account of the good, I now turn to the problem of stability. I shall treat it in two stages. In this chapter I discuss the acquisition of the sense of justice by the members of a well-ordered society, and I consider briefly the relative strength of this sentiment when defined by different moral conceptions. The final chapter examines the question of congruence, that is, whether the sense of justice coheres with the conception of our good so that both work together to uphold a just scheme. It is well to keep in mind that much of this chapter is preparation and that various topics are touched upon only to indicate the more basic points that are relevant for the philosophical theory. I begin with a definition of a well-ordered society and with some brief remarks about the meaning of stability. Then I sketch the development of the sense of justice as it presumably would take place once just institutions are firmly established and recognized to be just. The principles of moral psychology also receive some discussion; I emphasize the fact that they are reciprocity principles and connect this with the question of relative stability. The chapter concludes with an examination of the natural attributes in virtue of which human beings are owed the guarantees of equal justice, and which define the natural basis of equality.

#### 69. THE CONCEPT OF A WELL-ORDERED SOCIETY

At the beginning (§1) I characterized a well-ordered society as one designed to advance the good of its members and effectively regulated by a public conception of justice. Thus it is a society in which everyone accepts and knows that the others accept the same principles of justice, and the basic social institutions satisfy and are known to satisfy these principles. Now justice as fairness is framed to accord with this idea of society. The persons in the original position are to assume that the principles chosen are public, and so they must assess conceptions of justice in view of their probable effects as the generally recognized standards (§23). Conceptions that might work out well enough if understood and followed by a few or even by all, so long as this fact were not widely known, are excluded by the publicity condition. We should also note that since principles are consented to in the light of true general beliefs about men and their place in society, the conception of justice adopted is acceptable on the basis of these facts. There is no necessity to invoke theological or metaphysical doctrines to support its principles, nor to imagine another world that compensates for and corrects the inequalities which the two principles permit in this one. Conceptions of justice must be justified by the conditions of our life as we know it or not at all.1

Now a well-ordered society is also regulated by its public conception of justice. This fact implies that its members have a strong and normally effective desire to act as the principles of justice require. Since a well-ordered society endures over time, its conception of justice is presumably stable: that is, when institutions are just (as defined by this conception), those taking part in these arrangements acquire the corresponding sense of justice and desire to do their part in maintaining them. One conception of justice is more stable than another if the sense of justice that it tends to generate is stronger and more likely to override disruptive inclinations and if the institutions it allows foster weaker impulses and temptations to act unjustly. The stability of a conception depends upon a balance of motives: the sense of justice that it cultivates and the aims that it encourages must normally win out against propensities toward injustice. To estimate the stability of a conception of justice (and the well-ordered society that it defines), one must examine the relative strength of these opposing tendencies.

It is evident that stability is a desirable feature of moral conceptions. Other things equal, the persons in the original position will adopt the more stable scheme of principles. However attractive a conception of justice might be on other grounds, it is seriously defective if the principles of moral psychology are such that it fails to engender in human beings the requisite desire to act upon it. Thus in arguing further for the principles of justice as fairness, I should like to show that this conception is more stable than other alternatives. This argument from stability is for the most part in addition to the reasons so far adduced (except for consid-

<sup>1.</sup> It follows that such devices as Plato's Noble Lie in the *Republic,* bk. III, 414–415, are ruled out, as well as the advocacy of religion (when not believed) to buttress a social system that could not otherwise survive, as by the Grand Inquisitor in Dostoevsky's *The Brothers Karamazov.*

erations presented in §29). I wish to consider this notion in more detail both for its own sake and to prepare the way for the discussion of other matters such as the basis of equality and the priority of liberty.

To be sure, the criterion of stability is not decisive. In fact, some ethical theories have flouted it entirely, at least on some interpretations. Thus Bentham is occasionally said to have held both the classical principle of utility and the doctrine of psychological egoism. But if it is a psychological law that individuals pursue only interests in themselves, it is impossible for them to have an effective sense of justice (as defined by the principle of utility). The best that the ideal legislator can do is to design social arrangements so that from self- or group-interested motives citizens are persuaded to act in ways that maximize the sum of well-being. In this conception the identification of interests that results is truly artificial: it rests upon the artifice of reason, and individuals comply with the institutional scheme solely as a means to their separate concerns.2

This sort of divergence between principles of right and justice and human motives is unusual, although instructive as a limiting case. Most traditional doctrines hold that to some degree at least human nature is such that we acquire a desire to act justly when we have lived under and benefited from just institutions. To the extent that this is true, a conception of justice is psychologically suited to human inclinations. Moreover, should it turn out that the desire to act justly is also regulative of a rational plan of life, then acting justly is part of our good. In this event the conceptions of justice and goodness are compatible and the theory as a whole is congruent. The task of this chapter is to explain how justice as fairness generates its own support and to show that it is likely to have greater stability than the traditional alternatives, since it is more in line with the principles of moral psychology. To this end, I shall describe briefly how human beings in a well-ordered society might acquire a sense of justice and the other moral sentiments. Inevitably we shall have to take up some rather speculative psychological questions; but all along I have assumed that general facts about the world, including basic psychological principles, are known to the persons in the original position and relied upon by them in making their decisions. By reflecting on these problems here we survey these facts as they affect the initial agreement.

It may prevent misunderstanding if I make a few remarks about the

<sup>2.</sup> While Bentham is sometimes interpreted as a psychological egoist, he is not by Jacob Viner, "Bentham and J. S. Mill: The Utilitarian Background" (1949), reprinted in *The Long View and the Short* (Glencoe, Ill., Free Press, 1958); see pp. 312–314. Viner also gives what must be the correct rendering of Bentham's conception of the role of the legislator, pp. 316–319.

concepts of equilibrium and stability. Both of these ideas admit of considerable theoretical and mathematical refinement but I shall use them in an intuitive way.<sup>3</sup> The first thing to note perhaps is that they are applied to systems of some kind. Thus it is a system that is in equilibrium, and it is so when it has reached a state that persists indefinitely over time so long as no external forces impinge upon it. In order to define an equilibrium state precisely, the boundaries of the system have to be carefully drawn and its determining characteristics clearly set out. Three things are essential: first, to identify the system and to distinguish between internal and external forces; second, to define the states of the system, a state being a certain configuration of its determining characteristics; and third, to specify the laws connecting the states.

Some systems have no equilibrium states, while others have many. These matters depend upon the nature of the system. Now an equilibrium is stable whenever departures from it, caused say by external disturbances, call into play forces within the system that tend to bring it back to this equilibrium state, unless of course the outside shocks are too great. By contrast, an equilibrium is unstable when a movement away from it arouses forces within the system that lead to even greater changes. Systems are more or less stable depending upon the strength of the internal forces that are available to return them to equilibrium. Since in practice all social systems are subject to disturbances of some kind, they are practically stable, let us say, if the departures from their preferred equilibrium positions caused by normal disturbances elicit forces sufficiently strong to restore these equilibria after a decent length of time, or else to stay sufficiently close to them. These definitions are unhappily vague but they should serve our purposes.

The relevant systems here, of course, are the basic structures of the well-ordered societies corresponding to the different conceptions of justice. We are concerned with this complex of political, economic, and social institutions when it satisfies, and is publicly known by those en-

<sup>3.</sup> For the notions of equilibrium and stability applied to systems, see, for example, W. R. Ashby, Design for a Brain, 2nd ed. revised (London, Chapman and Hall, 1960), chs. 2–4, 19–20. The concept of stability I use is actually that of quasi-stability: if an equilibrium is stable, then all the variables return to their equilibrium values after a disturbance has moved the system away from equilibrium; a quasi-stable equilibrium is one in which only some of the variables return to their equilibrium configuration. For this definition, see Harvey Leibenstein, Economic Backwardness and Economic Growth (New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1957), p. 18. A well-ordered society is quasi-stable with respect to the justice of its institutions and the sense of justice needed to maintain this condition. While a shift in social circumstances may render its institutions no longer just, in due course they are reformed as the situation requires, and justice is restored.

gaged in it to satisfy, the appropriate principles of justice. We must try to assess the relative stability of these systems. Now I assume that the boundaries of these schemes are given by the notion of a self-contained national community. This supposition is not relaxed until the derivation of the principles of justice for the law of nations (§58), but the wider problems of international law I shall not further discuss. It is also essential to note that in the present case equilibrium and stability are to be defined with respect to the justice of the basic structure and the moral conduct of individuals. The stability of a conception of justice does not imply that the institutions and practices of the well-ordered society do not alter. In fact, such a society will presumably contain great diversity and adopt different arrangements from time to time. In this context stability means that however institutions are changed, they still remain just or approximately so, as adjustments are made in view of new social circumstances. The inevitable deviations from justice are effectively corrected or held within tolerable bounds by forces within the system. Among these forces I assume that the sense of justice shared by the members of the community has a fundamental role. To some degree, then, moral sentiments are necessary to insure that the basic structure is stable with respect to justice.

I now turn to how these sentiments are formed, and on this question there are, broadly speaking, two main traditions. The first stems historically from the doctrine of empiricism and is found in the utilitarians from Hume to Sidgwick. In its most recent and developed form it is represented by social learning theory. One main contention is that the aim of moral training is to supply missing motives: the desire to do what is right for its own sake, and the desire not to do what is wrong. Right conduct is conduct generally beneficial to others and to society (as defined by the principle of utility) for the doing of which we commonly lack an effective motive, whereas wrong conduct is behavior generally injurious to others and to society for the doing of which we often have a sufficient motive. Society must somehow make good these defects. This is achieved by the approbation and disapprobation of parents and of others in authority, who when necessary use rewards and punishments ranging from bestowal and withdrawal of affection to the administration of pleasures and pains. Eventually by various psychological processes we acquire a desire to do what is right and an aversion to doing what is wrong. A second thesis is that the desire to conform to moral standards is normally aroused early in life before we achieve an adequate understanding of the reasons for these norms. Indeed some persons may never grasp the grounds for them in the utilitarian principle.<sup>4</sup> The consequence is that our subsequent moral sentiments are likely to bear the scars of this early training which shapes more or less roughly our original nature.

Freud's theory is similar in important respects to this view. He holds that the processes by which the child comes to have moral attitudes center around the oedipal situation and the deep conflicts to which it gives rise. The moral precepts insisted upon by those in authority (in this case the parents) are accepted by the child as the best way to resolve his anxieties, and the resulting attitudes represented by the superego are likely to be harsh and punitive reflecting the stresses of the oedipal phase.<sup>5</sup> Thus Freud's account supports the two points that an essential part of moral learning occurs early in life before a reasoned basis for morality can be understood, and that it involves the acquisition of new motives by psychological processes marked by conflict and stress. Indeed, his doctrine is a dramatic illustration of these features. It follows that since parents and others in authority are bound to be in various ways misguided and selfseeking in their use of praise and blame, and rewards and punishments generally, our earlier and unexamined moral attitudes are likely to be in important respects irrational and without justification. Moral advance in later life consists partly in correcting these attitudes in the light of whatever principles we finally acknowledge to be sound.

The other tradition of moral learning derives from rationalist thought and is illustrated by Rousseau and Kant, and sometimes by J. S. Mill, and more recently by the theory of Piaget. Moral learning is not so much a matter of supplying missing motives as one of the free development of our innate intellectual and emotional capacities according to their natural bent. Once the powers of understanding mature and persons come to recognize their place in society and are able to take up the standpoint of others, they appreciate the mutual benefits of establishing fair terms of social cooperation. We have a natural sympathy with other persons and an

<sup>4.</sup> This sketch of moral learning draws from James Mill, the section of the *Fragment on Mackintosh*, which J. S. Mill included in a footnote to ch. XXIII of his father's *Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind* (1869). The passage is in [J. S.] *Mill's Ethical Writings*, ed. J. B. Schneewind (New York, Collier Books, 1965), pp. 259–270. For an account of social learning theory, see Albert Bandura, *Principles of Behavior Modification* (New York, Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1969). For a recent survey of moral learning, see Roger Brown, *Social Psychology* (New York, The Free Press, 1965), ch. VIII; and Martin L. Hoffman, "Moral Development," in *Carmichael's Manual of Psychology*, ed. Paul H. Mussen, 3rd ed. (New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1970), vol. 2, ch. 23; pp. 282–332 is on social learning theory.

<sup>5.</sup> For accounts of Freud's theory of moral learning, see Roger Brown, *Social Psychology*, pp. 350–381; and Ronald Fletcher, *Instinct in Man* (New York, International Universities Press, 1957), ch. VI, esp. pp. 226–234.

innate susceptibility to the pleasures of fellow feeling and self-mastery, and these provide the affective basis for the moral sentiments once we have a clear grasp of our relations to our associates from an appropriately general perspective. Thus this tradition regards the moral feelings as a natural outgrowth of a full appreciation of our social nature. <sup>6</sup>

Mill expresses the view as follows: the arrangements of a just society are so suited to us that anything which is obviously necessary for it is accepted much like a physical necessity. An indispensable condition of such a society is that all shall have consideration for the others on the basis of mutually acceptable principles of reciprocity. It is painful for us when our feelings are not in union with those of our fellows; and this tendency to sociality provides in due course a firm basis for the moral sentiments. Moreover, Mill adds, to be held accountable to the principles of justice in one's dealings with others does not stunt our nature. Instead it realizes our social sensibilities and by exposing us to a larger good enables us to control our narrower impulses. It is only when we are restrained not because we injure the good of others but by their mere displeasure, or what seems to us their arbitrary authority, that our nature is blunted. If the reasons for moral injunctions are made plain in terms of the just claims of others, these constraints do us no injury but are seen to be compatible with our good. Moral learning is not so much a matter of acquiring new motives, for these will come about of themselves once the requisite developments in our intellectual and emotional capacities have taken place. It follows that a full grasp of moral conceptions must await maturity; the child's understanding is always primitive and the characteristic features of his morality fall away in later stages. The rationalist tradition presents a happier picture, since it holds that the principles of right and justice spring from our nature and are not at odds with our good, whereas the other account would seem to include no such guarantee.

I shall not try to assess the relative merits of these two conceptions of

<sup>6.</sup> For Rousseau, see *Emile*, trans. Barbara Foxley (London, J.M. Dent and Sons, 1908), esp. pp. 46–66 (in bk. II), 172–196, 244–258 (in bk. IV); for Kant, *The Critique of Practical Reason*, pt. II, with the misleading name: The Methodology of Pure Practical Reason; and J. S. Mill as cited below, note 7. For Jean Piaget, see *The Moral Judgment of the Child*, trans. Marjorie Gabain (London, Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1932). Further development of this approach is found in Lawrence Kohlberg; see "The Development of Children's Orientation toward a Moral Order: 1. Sequence in the Development of Moral Thought," *Vita Humana*, vol. 6 (1963); and "Stage and Sequence: The Cognitive Developmental Approach to Socialization," in *Handbook of Socialization Theory and Research*, ed. D. A. Goslin (Chicago, Rand McNally, 1969), ch. VI. For a critique, see Hoffman, "Moral Development," pp. 264–275 (on Piaget), pp. 276–281 (on Kohlberg).

<sup>7.</sup> For Mill's view, see *Utilitarianism*, chs. III and V, pars. 16–25; *On Liberty*, ch. III, par. 10; and *Mill's Ethical Writings*, ed. J. B. Schneewind, pp. 257–259.

moral learning. Surely there is much that is sound in both and it seems preferable to try to combine them in a natural way. It must be emphasized that a moral view is an extremely complex structure of principles, ideals, and precepts, and involves all the elements of thought, conduct, and feeling. Certainly many kinds of learning ranging from reinforcement and classical conditioning to highly abstract reasoning and the refined perception of exemplars enter into its development. Presumably at some time or other each has a necessary role. In the next several sections (§§70–72) I sketch the course of moral development as it might occur in a well-ordered society realizing the principles of justice as fairness. I am concerned solely with this special case. Thus my aim is to indicate the major steps whereby a person would acquire an understanding of and an attachment to the principles of justice as he grows up in this particular form of well-ordered society. These steps I take to be identified by the main structural features of the complete scheme of principles, ideals, and precepts, as these are applied to social arrangements. As I shall explain, we are led to distinguish between the moralities of authority, of association, and of principles. The account of moral development is tied throughout to the conception of justice which is to be learned, and therefore presupposes the plausibility if not the correctness of this theory.8

A caveat is apropos here similar to that I made before in regard to the remarks on economic theory (§42). We want the psychological account of moral learning to be true and in accordance with existing knowledge. But of course it is impossible to take the details into account; I sketch at best only the main outlines. One must keep in mind that the purpose of the following discussion is to examine the question of stability and to

8. While the view of moral development to follow in §§70–72 is designed to fit the theory of justice, I have borrowed from several sources. The idea of three stages the content of which is given by precepts, role ideals, and principles is similar to William McDougall, *An Introduction to Social Psychology* (London, Methuen, 1908), chs. VII–VIII. Piaget's *The Moral Judgment of the Child* suggested to me the contrast between the morality of authority and the moralities of association and principles, and much of the description of these stages. See also Kohlberg's further elaboration of this type of theory in the references cited in note 6 above, esp. pp. 369–389, on his six stages. In the last several paragraphs of §75 I note some differences between the view I present and these writers. Concerning Kohlberg's theory, I should add here that I believe the morality of association is parallel to his stages three to five. Development within this stage is being able to assume more complex, demanding, and comprehensive roles. But more important, I assume that the final stage, the morality of principles, may have different contents given by any of the traditional philosophical doctrines we have discussed. It is true that I argue for the theory of justice as superior, and work out the psychological theory on this presumption; but this superiority is a philosophical question and cannot, I believe, be established by the psychological theory of development alone.

contrast the psychological roots of the various conceptions of justice. The crucial point is how the general facts of moral psychology affect the choice of principles in the original position. Unless the psychological account is defective in a way that would call into question the acknowledgment of the principles of justice rather than the standard of utility, say, no irreparable difficulty should ensue. I also hope that none of the further uses of psychological theory will prove too wide of the mark. Particularly important among these is the account of the basis of equality.

#### 70. THE MORALITY OF AUTHORITY

The first stage in the sequence of moral development I shall refer to as the morality of authority. While certain aspects of this morality are preserved at later stages for special occasions, we can regard the morality of authority in its primitive form as that of the child. I assume that the sense of justice is acquired gradually by the younger members of society as they grow up. The succession of generations and the necessity to teach moral attitudes (however simple) to children is one of the conditions of human life.

Now I shall assume that the basic structure of a well-ordered society includes the family in some form, and therefore that children are at first subject to the legitimate authority of their parents. Of course, in a broader inquiry the institution of the family might be questioned, and other arrangements might indeed prove to be preferable. But presumably the account of the morality of authority could, if necessary, be adjusted to fit these different schemes. In any event, it is characteristic of the child's situation that he is not in a position to assess the validity of the precepts and injunctions addressed to him by those in authority, in this case his parents. He lacks both the knowledge and the understanding on the basis of which their guidance can be challenged. Indeed, the child lacks the concept of justification altogether, this being acquired much later. Therefore he cannot with reason doubt the propriety of parental injunctions. But since we are assuming that the society is well-ordered we may suppose, so as to avoid needless complications, that these precepts are on the whole justified. They accord with a reasonable interpretation of familial duties as defined by the principles of justice.

The parents, we may suppose, love the child and in time the child comes to love and to trust his parents. How does this change in the child come about? To answer this question I assume the following psychological principle: the child comes to love the parents only if they manifestly first love him. Thus the child's actions are motivated initially by certain instincts and desires, and his aims are regulated (if at all) by rational self-interest (in a suitably restricted sense). Although the child has the potentiality for love, his love of the parents is a new desire brought about by his recognizing their evident love of him and his benefiting from the actions in which their love is expressed.

The parents' love of the child is expressed in their evident intention to care for him, to do for him as his rational self-love would incline, and in the fulfillment of these intentions. Their love is displayed by their taking pleasure in his presence and supporting his sense of competence and self-esteem. They encourage his efforts to master the tasks of growing up and they welcome his assuming his own place. In general, to love another means not only to be concerned for his wants and needs, but to affirm his sense of the worth of his own person. Eventually, then, the love of the parents for the child gives rise to his love in return. The child's love does not have a rational instrumental explanation: he does not love them as a means to achieve his initial self-interested ends. With this aim in view he could conceivably act as if he loved them, but his doing so would not constitute a transformation of his original desires. By the stated psychological principle, a new affection is in time called into being by the evident love of the parents.

There are several ways in which this psychological law may be analyzed into further elements. Thus it is unlikely that the child's recognition of parental affection causes directly a returning sentiment. We may conjecture several other steps as follows: when the parents' love of the child is recognized by him on the basis of their evident intentions, the child is assured of his worth as a person. He is made aware that he is appreciated for his own sake by what are to him the imposing and powerful persons in his world. He experiences parental affection as unconditional; they care for his presence and spontaneous acts, and the pleasure they take in him is not dependent upon disciplined performances that contribute to the well-being of others. In due course, the child comes to trust his parents and to have confidence in his surroundings; and this leads him to launch out and to test his maturing abilities, all the while supported by their affection and

<sup>9.</sup> The formulation of this psychological law is drawn from Rousseau's *Emile*, p. 174. Rousseau says that while we like from the start what contributes to our preservation, this attachment is quite unconscious and instinctive. "Ce que transforme cet instinct en sentiment, l'attachement en amour, l'aversion en haine, c'est l'intention manifestée de nous nuire ou de nous être utile."

encouragement. Gradually he acquires various skills and develops a sense of competence that affirms his self-esteem. It is in the course of this whole process that the child's affection for his parents develops. He connects them with the success and enjoyment that he has had in sustaining his world, and with his sense of his own worth. And this brings about his love for them.

We must now consider how the child's love and trust will show itself. At this point it is necessary to keep in mind the peculiar features of the authority situation. The child does not have his own standards of criticism, since he is not in a position to reject precepts on rational grounds. If he loves and trusts his parents, he will tend to accept their injunctions. He will also strive to be like them, assuming that they are indeed worthy of esteem and adhere to the precepts which they enjoin. They exemplify, let us suppose, superior knowledge and power, and set forth appealing examples of what is demanded. The child, therefore, accepts their judgment of him and he will be inclined to judge himself as they do when he violates their injunctions. At the same time, of course, his desires exceed the bonds of what is permitted, for otherwise there would be no need for these precepts. Thus parental norms are experienced as constraints and the child may rebel against them. After all, he may see no reason why he should comply with them; they are in themselves arbitrary prohibitions and he has no original tendency to do the things he is told to do. Yet if he does love and trust his parents, then, once he has given in to temptation, he is disposed to share their attitude toward his misdemeanors. He will be inclined to confess his transgression and to seek reconciliation. In these various inclinations are manifested the feelings of (authority) guilt. Without these and related inclinations, feelings of guilt would not exist. But it is also true that the absence of these feelings would indicate a lack of love and trust. For given the nature of the authority situation and the principles of moral psychology connecting the ethical and the natural attitudes, love and trust will give rise to feelings of guilt once the parental injunctions are disobeyed. Admittedly in the case of the child it is sometimes difficult to distinguish feelings of guilt from the fear of punishment, and especially from the dread of the loss of parental love and affection. The child lacks the concepts for understanding moral distinctions and this will reflect itself in his behavior. I have supposed, however, that even in the child's case we can separate (authority) guilt feelings from fear and anxiety.

In the light of this sketch of the development of the morality of authority, it seems that the conditions favoring its being learned by the child are these.10 First, the parents must love the child and be worthy objects of his admiration. In this way they arouse in him a sense of his own value and the desire to become the sort of person that they are. Secondly, they must enunciate clear and intelligible (and of course justifiable) rules adapted to the child's level of comprehension. In addition they should set out the reasons for these injunctions so far as these can be understood, and they must also follow these precepts insofar as they apply to them as well. The parents should exemplify the morality which they enjoin, and make explicit its underlying principles as time goes on. Doing this is required not only to arouse the child's inclination to accept these principles at a later time, but also to convey how they are to be interpreted in particular cases. Presumably moral development fails to take place to the extent that these conditions are absent, and especially if parental injunctions are not only harsh and unjustified, but enforced by punitive and even physical sanctions. The child's having a morality of authority consists in his being disposed without the prospect of reward or punishment to follow certain precepts that not only may appear to him largely arbitrary but which in no way appeal to his original inclinations. If he acquires the desire to abide by these prohibitions, it is because he sees them as addressed to him by powerful persons who have his love and trust, and who also act in conformity with them. He then concludes that they express forms of action that characterize the sort of person he should want to be. In the absence of affection, example, and guidance, none of these processes can take place, and certainly not in loveless relationships maintained by coercive threats and reprisals.

The child's morality of authority is primitive because for the most part it consists of a collection of precepts, and he cannot comprehend the larger scheme of right and justice within which the rules addressed to him are justified. But even a developed morality of authority in which the basis of the rules can be understood shows many of the same features, and contains similar virtues and vices. There is typically an authoritative person who is loved and trusted, or at least who is accepted as worthy of his position, and whose precepts it is one's duty to follow implicitly. It is not for us to consider the consequences, this being left for those in authority. The prized virtues are obedience, humility, and fidelity to authoritative persons; the leading vices are disobedience, self-will, and temerity. We are to do what is expected without questioning, for not so to act

<sup>10.</sup> Here I borrow and adapt from E. E. Maccoby, "Moral Values and Behavior in Childhood," in *Socialization and Society,* ed. J. A. Clausen (Boston, Little, Brown, 1968), and Hoffman, "Moral Development," pp. 282–319.

expresses doubt and distrust, and a certain arrogance and tendency to suspicion. Clearly the morality of authority must be subordinate to the principles of right and justice which alone can determine when these extreme requirements, or analogous constraints, are justified. The child's morality of authority is temporary, a necessity arising from his peculiar situation and limited understanding. Moreover, the theological parallel is a special case which, in view of the principle of equal liberty, does not apply to the basic structure of society (§33). Thus the morality of authority has but a restricted role in fundamental social arrangements and can be justified only when the unusual demands of the practice in question make it essential to give certain individuals the prerogatives of leadership and command. In all cases, the scope of this morality is governed by the principles of justice.

#### 71. THE MORALITY OF ASSOCIATION

The second stage of moral development is that of the morality of association. This stage covers a wide range of cases depending on the association in question and it may even include the national community as a whole. Whereas the child's morality of authority consists largely of a collection of precepts, the content of the morality of association is given by the moral standards appropriate to the individual's role in the various associations to which he belongs. These standards include the common sense rules of morality along with the adjustments required to fit them to a person's particular position; and they are impressed upon him by the approval and disapproval of those in authority, or by the other members of the group. Thus at this stage the family itself is viewed as a small association, normally characterized by a definite hierarchy, in which each member has certain rights and duties. As the child becomes older he is taught the standards of conduct suitable for one in his station. The virtues of a good son or a good daughter are explained, or at least conveyed by parental expectations as shown in their approvals and disapprovals. Similarly there is the association of the school and the neighborhood, and also such short-term forms of cooperation, though not less important for this, as games and play with peers. Corresponding to these arrangements one learns the virtues of a good student and classmate, and the ideals of a good sport and companion. This type of moral view extends to the ideals adopted in later life, and so to one's various adult statuses and occupations, one's family position, and even to one's place as a member of society. The content of these ideals is given by the various conceptions of a good wife and husband, a good friend and citizen, and so on. Thus the morality of association includes a large number of ideals each defined in ways suitable for the respective status or role. Our moral understanding increases as we move in the course of life through a sequence of positions. The corresponding sequence of ideals requires increasingly greater intellectual judgment and finer moral discriminations. Clearly some of these ideals are also more comprehensive than others and make quite different demands upon the individual. As we shall see, having to follow certain ideals quite naturally leads up to a morality of principles.

Now each particular ideal is presumably explained in the context of the aims and purposes of the association to which the role or position in question belongs. In due course a person works out a conception of the whole system of cooperation that defines the association and the ends which it serves. He knows that others have different things to do depending upon their place in the cooperative scheme. Thus he eventually learns to take up their point of view and to see things from their perspective. It seems plausible, then, that acquiring a morality of association (represented by some structure of ideals) rests upon the development of the intellectual skills required to regard things from a variety of points of view and to think of these together as aspects of one system of cooperation. In fact, when we consider it, the requisite array of abilities is quite complex.11 First of all, we must recognize that these different points of view exist, that the perspectives of others are not the same as ours. But we must not only learn that things look different to them, but that they have different wants and ends, and different plans and motives; and we must learn how to gather these facts from their speech, conduct, and countenance. Next, we need to identify the definitive features of these perspectives, what it is that others largely want and desire, what are their controlling beliefs and opinions. Only in this way can we understand and assess their actions, intentions, and motives. Unless we can identify these leading elements, we cannot put ourselves into another's place and find out what we would do in his position. To work out these things, we must, of course, know what the other person's perspective really is. But finally, having understood another's situation, it still remains for us to regulate our own conduct in the appropriate way by reference to it.

Doing these things to a certain minimum degree at least comes easily

<sup>11.</sup> For the following remarks, I am indebted to John Flavell, *The Development of Role-Taking and Communication Skills in Children* (New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1968), pp. 208–211. See also G. H. Mead, *Mind, Self and Society* (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1934), pp. 135–164.

to adults, but it is difficult for children. No doubt this explains in part why the precepts of the child's primitive morality of authority are usually expressed in terms referring to external behavior, and why motives and intentions are largely neglected by children in their appraisal of actions. The child has not yet mastered the art of perceiving the person of others, that is, the art of discerning their beliefs, intentions, and feelings, so that an awareness of these things cannot inform his interpretation of their behavior. Moreover, his ability to put himself in their place is still untutored and likely to lead him astray. It is no surprise, then, that these elements, so important from the final moral point of view, are left out of account at the earliest stage.12 But this lack is gradually overcome as we assume a succession of more demanding roles with their more complex schemes of rights and duties. The corresponding ideals require us to view things from a greater multiplicity of perspectives as the conception of the basic structure implies.

I have touched upon these aspects of intellectual development for the sake of completeness. I cannot consider them in any detail, but we should note that they obviously have a central place in the acquisition of moral views. How well the art of perceiving the person is learned is bound to affect one's moral sensibility; and it is equally important to understand the intricacies of social cooperation. But these abilities are not sufficient. Someone whose designs are purely manipulative, and who wishes to exploit others for his own advantage, must likewise, if he lacks overwhelming force, possess these skills. The tricks of persuasion and gamesmanship call upon the same intellectual accomplishments. We must, then, examine how we become attached to our fellow associates and later to social arrangements generally. Consider the case of an association the public rules of which are known by all to be just. Now how does it come about that those taking part in the arrangement are bound by ties of friendship and mutual trust and that they rely on one another to do their part? We may suppose that these feelings and attitudes have been generated by participation in the association. Thus once a person's capacity for fellow feeling has been realized by his acquiring attachments in accordance with the first psychological law, then as his associates with evident intention live up to their duties and obligations, he develops friendly feelings toward them, together with feelings of trust and confidence. And this principle is a second psychological law. As individuals enter the association one by one over a period of time, or group by group (suitably

<sup>12.</sup> For a discussion of these points, see Roger Brown, *Social Psychology,* pp. 239–244.

limited in size), they acquire these attachments when others of longer standing membership do their part and live up to the ideals of their station. Thus if those engaged in a system of social cooperation regularly act with evident intention to uphold its just (or fair) rules, bonds of friendship and mutual trust tend to develop among them, thereby holding them ever more securely to the scheme.

Once these ties are established, a person tends to experience feelings of (association) guilt when he fails to do his part. These feelings show themselves in various ways, for example, in the inclination to make good the harms caused to others (reparation), if such harms have occurred, as well as in a willingness to admit that what one has done is unfair (wrong) and to apologize for it. Feelings of guilt are also manifest in conceding the propriety of punishment and censure, and in finding it more difficult to be angry and indignant with others when they likewise fail to do their share. The absence of these inclinations would betray an absence of ties of friendship and mutual trust. It would indicate a readiness to associate with others in disregard of the standards and criteria of legitimate expectations that are publicly recognized and used by all to adjudicate their disagreements. A person without these feelings of guilt has no qualms about the burdens that fall on others, nor is he troubled by the breaches of confidence by which they are deceived. But when relations of friendship and trust exist, such inhibitions and reactions tend to be aroused by the failure to fulfill one's duties and obligations. If these emotional constraints are missing, there is at best only a show of fellow feeling and mutual trust. Thus just as in the first stage certain natural attitudes develop toward the parents, so here ties of friendship and confidence grow up among associates. In each case certain natural attitudes underlie the corresponding moral feelings: a lack of these feelings would manifest the absence of these attitudes.

The second psychological law presumably takes hold in ways similar to the first. Since the arrangements of an association are recognized to be just (and in the more complex roles the principles of justice are understood and serve to define the ideal appropriate), thereby insuring that all of its members benefit and know that they benefit from its activities, the conduct of others in doing their part is taken to be to the advantage of each. Here the evident intention to honor one's obligations and duties is seen as a form of good will, and this recognition arouses feelings of friendship and trust in return. In due course the reciprocal effects of everyone's doing his share strengthen one another until a kind of equilibrium is reached. But we may also suppose that the newer members of the association recognize moral exemplars, that is, persons who are in various ways admired and who exhibit to a high degree the ideal corresponding to their position. These individuals display skills and abilities, and virtues of character and temperament, that attract our fancy and arouse in us the desire that we should be like them, and able to do the same things. Partly this desire to emulate springs from viewing their attributes as prerequisites for their more privileged positions, but it is also a companion effect to the Aristotelian Principle, since we enjoy the display of more complex and subtle activities and these displays tend to elicit a desire in us to do these things ourselves. Thus when the moral ideals belonging to the various roles of a just association are lived up to with evident intention by attractive and admirable persons, these ideals are likely to be adopted by those who witness their realization. These conceptions are perceived as a form of good will and the activity in which they are exemplified is shown to be a human excellence that others likewise can appreciate. The same two psychological processes are present as before: other persons act with evident intention to affirm our well-being and at the same time they exhibit qualities and ways of doing things that appeal to us and arouse the desire to model ourselves after them.

The morality of association takes many forms depending upon the association and role in question, and these forms represent many levels of complexity. But if we consider the more demanding offices that are defined by the major institutions of society, the principles of justice will be recognized as regulating the basic structure and as belonging to the content of a number of important ideals. Indeed, these principles apply to the role of citizen held by all, since everyone, and not only those in public life, is meant to have political views concerning the common good. Thus we may suppose that there is a morality of association in which the members of society view one another as equals, as friends and associates, joined together in a system of cooperation known to be for the advantage of all and governed by a common conception of justice. The content of this morality is characterized by the cooperative virtues: those of justice and fairness, fidelity and trust, integrity and impartiality. The typical vices are graspingness and unfairness, dishonesty and deceit, prejudice and bias. Among associates, giving into these faults tends to arouse feelings of (association) guilt on the one side and resentment and indignation on the other. These moral attitudes are bound to exist once we become attached to those cooperating with us in a just (or fair) scheme.

#### 72. THE MORALITY OF PRINCIPLES

Someone attaining to the more complex forms of the morality of association, as expressed say by the ideal of equal citizen, has an understanding certainly of the principles of justice. He has also developed an attachment to many particular individuals and communities, and he is disposed to follow the moral standards that apply to him in his various positions and which are upheld by social approval and disapproval. Having become affiliated with others and aspiring to live up to these ethical conceptions, he is concerned to win acceptance for his conduct and aims. It would seem that while the individual understands the principles of justice, his motive for complying with them, for some time at least, springs largely from his ties of friendship and fellow feeling for others, and his concern for the approbation of the wider society. I should now like to consider the process whereby a person becomes attached to these highest-order principles themselves, so that just as during the earlier phase of the morality of association he may want to be a good sport, say, he now wishes to be a just person. The conception of acting justly, and of advancing just institutions, comes to have for him an attraction analogous to that possessed before by subordinate ideals.

In conjecturing how this morality of principles might come about (principles here meaning first principles such as those considered in the original position), we should note that the morality of association quite naturally leads up to a knowledge of the standards of justice. In a well-ordered society anyway not only do those standards define the public conception of justice, but citizens who take an interest in political affairs, and those holding legislative and judicial and other similar offices, are constantly required to apply and to interpret them. They often have to take up the point of view of others, not simply with the aim of working out what they will want and probably do, but for the purpose of striking a reasonable balance between competing claims and for adjusting the various subordinate ideals of the morality of association. To put the principles of justice into practice requires that we adopt the standpoints defined by the four-stage sequence (§31). As the situation dictates, we take up the perspective of a constitutional convention, or of a legislature, or whatever. Eventually one achieves a mastery of these principles and understands the values they secure and the way in which they are to everyone's advantage. Now this leads to an acceptance of these principles by a third psychological law. This law states that once the attitudes of love and trust, and of friendly feelings and mutual confidence, have been generated in accordance with the two preceding psychological laws, then the recognition that we and those for whom we care are the beneficiaries of an established and enduring just institution tends to engender in us the corresponding sense of justice. We develop a desire to apply and to act upon the principles of justice once we realize how social arrangements answering to them have promoted our good and that of those with whom we are affiliated. In due course we come to appreciate the ideal of just human cooperation.

Now a sense of justice shows itself in at least two ways. First, it leads us to accept the just institutions that apply to us and from which we and our associates have benefited. We want to do our part in maintaining these arrangements. We tend to feel guilty when we do not honor our duties and obligations, even though we are not bound to those of whom we take advantage by any ties of particular fellow feeling. It may be that they have not yet had sufficient opportunity to display an evident intention to do their share, and are not therefore the objects of such feelings by the second law. Or, again, the institutional scheme in question may be so large that particular bonds never get widely built up. In any case, the citizen body as a whole is not generally bound together by ties of fellow feeling between individuals, but by the acceptance of public principles of justice. While every citizen is a friend to some citizens, no citizen is a friend to all. But their common allegiance to justice provides a unified perspective from which they can adjudicate their differences. Secondly, a sense of justice gives rise to a willingness to work for (or at least not to oppose) the setting up of just institutions, and for the reform of existing ones when justice requires it. We desire to act on the natural duty to advance just arrangements. And this inclination goes beyond the support of those particular schemes that have affirmed our good. It seeks to extend the conception they embody to further situations for the good of the larger community.

When we go against our sense of justice we explain our feelings of guilt by reference to the principles of justice. These feelings, then, are accounted for quite differently than the emotions of authority and association guilt. The complete moral development has now taken place and for the first time we experience feelings of guilt in the strict sense; and the same is true of the other moral emotions. In the child's case, the notion of a moral ideal, and the relevance of intentions and motives, are not understood, and so the appropriate setting for feelings of (principle) guilt does not exist. And in the morality of association, moral feelings depend essentially on ties of friendship and trust to particular individuals or communities, and moral conduct is based in large part on wanting the approval of one's associates. This may still be true even in the more demanding phases of this morality. Individuals in their role as citizens with a full understanding of the content of the principles of justice may be moved to act upon them largely because of their bonds to particular persons and an attachment to their own society. Once a morality of principles is accepted, however, moral attitudes are no longer connected solely with the well-being and approval of particular individuals and groups, but are shaped by a conception of right chosen irrespective of these contingencies. Our moral sentiments display an independence from the accidental circumstances of our world, the meaning of this independence being given by the description of the original position and its Kantian interpretation.

But even though moral sentiments are in this sense independent from contingencies, our natural attachments to particular persons and groups still have an appropriate place. For within the morality of principles the infractions which earlier gave rise to (association) guilt and resentment, and to the other moral feelings, now occasion these feelings in the strict sense. A reference to the relevant principle is made in explaining one's emotions. When the natural ties of friendship and mutual trust are present, however, these moral feelings are more intense than if they are absent. Existing attachments heighten the feeling of guilt and indignation, or whatever feeling is called for, even at the stage of the morality of principles. Now granting that this heightening is appropriate, it follows that violations of these natural ties are wrongs. For if we suppose that, say, a rational feeling of guilt (that is, a feeling of guilt arising from applying the correct moral principles in the light of true or reasonable beliefs) implies a fault on our part, and that a greater feeling of guilt implies a greater fault, then indeed breach of trust and the betrayal of friendships, and the like, are especially forbidden. The violation of these ties to particular individuals and groups arouses more intense moral feelings, and this entails that these offenses are worse. To be sure, deceit and infidelity are always wrong, being contrary to natural duties and obligations. But they are not always equally wrong. They are worse whenever bonds of affection and good faith have been formed, and this consideration is relevant in working out the appropriate priority rules.

It may seem strange at first that we should come to have the desire to act from a conception of right and justice. How is it possible that moral principles can engage our affections? In justice as fairness there are several answers to this question. First of all, as we have seen (§25), moral principles are bound to have a certain content. Since they are chosen by rational persons to adjudicate competing claims, they define agreed ways of advancing human interests. Institutions and actions are appraised from the standpoint of securing these ends; and therefore pointless principles, for example, that one is not to look up at the sky on Tuesdays, are rejected as burdensome and irrational constraints. In the original position rational persons have no reason for acknowledging standards of this kind. But secondly, it is also the case that the sense of justice is continuous with the love of mankind. I noted earlier (§30) that benevolence is at a loss when the many objects of its love oppose one another. The principles of justice are needed to guide it. The difference between the sense of justice and the love of mankind is that the latter is supererogatory, going beyond the moral requirements and not invoking the exemptions which the principles of natural duty and obligation allow. Yet clearly the objects of these two sentiments are closely related, being defined in large part by the same conception of justice. If one of them seems natural and intelligible, so is the other. Moreover, feelings of guilt and indignation are aroused by the injuries and deprivations of others unjustifiably brought about either by ourselves or third parties, and our sense of justice is offended in the same way. The content of the principles of justice accounts for this. Finally, the Kantian interpretation of these principles shows that by acting upon them men express their nature as free and equal rational beings (§40). Since doing this belongs to their good, the sense of justice aims at their well-being even more directly. It supports those arrangements that enable everyone to express his common nature. Indeed, without a common or overlapping sense of justice civic friendship cannot exist. The desire to act justly is not, then, a form of blind obedience to arbitrary principles unrelated to rational aims.

I should not, of course, contend that justice as fairness is the only doctrine that can interpret the sense of justice in a natural way. As Sidgwick notes, a utilitarian never regards himself as acting merely for the sake of an impersonal law, but always for the welfare of some being or beings for whom he has some degree of fellow feeling.13 The utilitarian view, and no doubt perfectionism as well, meets the condition that the sentiment of justice can be characterized so that it is psychologically understandable. Best of all, a theory should present a description of an ideally just state of affairs, a conception of a well-ordered society such that the aspiration to realize this state of affairs, and to maintain it in being, answers to our good and is continuous with our natural sentiments.

<sup>13.</sup> *Methods of Ethics,* 7th ed. (London, Macmillan, 1907), p. 501.

A perfectly just society should be part of an ideal that rational human beings could desire more than anything else once they had full knowledge and experience of what it was.14 The content of the principles of justice, the way in which they are derived, and the stages of moral development show how in justice as fairness such an interpretation is possible.

It would seem, then, that the doctrine of the purely conscientious act is irrational. This doctrine holds, first, that the highest moral motive is the desire to do what is right and just simply because it is right and just, no other description being appropriate; and second, that while other motives certainly have moral value, for example the desire to do what is right because doing this increases human happiness, or because it tends to promote equality, these desires are less morally worthy than that to do what is right solely in virtue of its being right. Ross holds that the sense of right is a desire for a distinct (and unanalyzable) object, since a specific (and unanalyzable) property characterizes actions that are our duty. The other morally worthy desires, while indeed desires for things necessarily connected with what is right, are not desires for the right as such.15 But on this interpretation the sense of right lacks any apparent reason; it resembles a preference for tea rather than coffee. Although such a preference might exist, to make it regulative of the basic structure of society is utterly capricious; and no less so because it is masked by a fortunate necessary connection with reasonable grounds for judgments of right.

But for one who understands and accepts the contract doctrine, the sentiment of justice is not a different desire from that to act on principles that rational individuals would consent to in an initial situation which gives everyone equal representation as a moral person. Nor is it different from wanting to act in accordance with principles that express men's nature as free and equal rational beings. The principles of justice answer to these descriptions and this fact allows us to give an acceptable interpretation to the sense of justice. In the light of the theory of justice we understand how the moral sentiments can be regulative in our life and have the role attributed to them by the formal conditions on moral principles. Being governed by these principles means that we want to live with

<sup>14.</sup> On this point, see G. C. Field, *Moral Theory,* 2nd ed. (London, Methuen, 1932), pp. 135f, 141f. 15. For the notion of the purely conscientious act, see W. D. Ross, *The Right and the Good* (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1930), pp. 157–160, and *The Foundations of Ethics* (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1939), pp. 205f. That this notion makes the right an arbitrary preference, I borrow from J. N. Findlay, *Values and Intentions* (London, George Allen and Unwin, 1961), pp. 213f.

others on terms that everyone would recognize as fair from a perspective that all would accept as reasonable. The ideal of persons cooperating on this basis exercises a natural attraction upon our affections.

Finally, we may observe that the morality of principles takes two forms, one corresponding to the sense of right and justice, the other to the love of mankind and to self-command. As we have noted, the latter is supererogatory, while the former is not. In its normal form of right and justice the morality of principles includes the virtues of the moralities of authority and association. It defines the last stage at which all the subordinate ideals are finally understood and organized into a coherent system by suitably general principles. The virtues of the other moralities receive their explanation and justification within the larger scheme; and their respective claims are adjusted by the priorities assigned by the more comprehensive conception. The morality of supererogation has two aspects depending upon the direction in which the requirements of the morality of principles are willingly surpassed. On the one hand, the love of mankind shows itself in advancing the common good in ways that go well beyond our natural duties and obligations. This morality is not one for ordinary persons, and its peculiar virtues are those of benevolence, a heightened sensitivity to the feelings and wants of others, and a proper humility and unconcern with self. The morality of self-command, on the other hand, in its simplest form is manifest in fulfilling with complete ease and grace the requirements of right and justice. It becomes truly supererogatory when the individual displays its characteristic virtues of courage, magnanimity, and self-control in actions presupposing great discipline and training. And this he may do either by freely assuming offices and positions which call upon these virtues if their duties are to be well performed; or else by seeking superior ends in a manner consistent with justice but surpassing the demands of duty and obligation. Thus the moralities of supererogation, those of the saint and the hero, do not contradict the norms of right and justice; they are marked by the willing adoption by the self of aims continuous with these principles but extending beyond what they enjoin.16

16. In this account of the aspects of the morality of supererogation I have drawn upon J. O. Urmson, "Saints and Heroes," in *Essays in Moral Philosophy,* ed. A. I. Melden (Seattle, University of Washington Press, 1958). The notion of self-command is taken from Adam Smith, *The Theory of the Moral Sentiments,* pt. VI, sec. III, which may be found in *Adam Smith's Moral and Political Philosophy,* ed. H. W. Schneider (New York, Hafner, 1948), pp. 251–277.

#### 73. FEATURES OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS

In the next sections I discuss several aspects of the three stages of morality in more detail. The concept of a moral sentiment, the nature of the three psychological laws, and the process whereby they take hold call for further comment. Turning to the first of these matters, I should explain that I shall use the older term "sentiment" for permanent ordered families of governing dispositions, such as the sense of justice and the love of mankind (§30), and for lasting attachments to particular individuals or associations that have a central place in a person's life. Thus there are both moral and natural sentiments. The term "attitude" I use more broadly. Like sentiments, attitudes are ordered families of dispositions either moral or natural, but in their case the tendencies need not be so regulative or enduring. Finally, I shall use the phrases "moral feeling" and "moral emotion" for the feelings and emotions that we experience on particular occasions. I wish to clarify the connection between moral sentiments, attitudes, and feelings, and the relevant moral principles.

The main features of moral sentiments can perhaps be best elucidated by considering the various questions that arise in trying to characterize them and the various feelings in which they are manifested.17 It is worthwhile to observe the ways in which they are distinguished both from each other and from those natural attitudes and feelings with which they are likely to be confused. Thus, first of all, there are such questions as the following: (a) What are the linguistic expressions that are used to give voice to having a particular moral feeling, and the significant variations, if any, in these expressions? (b) What are the characteristic behavioral indications of a given feeling, and what are the ways in which a person typically betrays how he feels? (c) What are the characteristic sensations and kinesthetic feelings, if any, that are connected with moral emotions? When a person is angry, for example, he may feel hot; he may tremble and experience a tightening of the stomach. He may be unable to speak

<sup>17.</sup> These questions are suggested by applying to the concept of the moral feelings the kind of inquiry carried out by Wittgenstein in the *Philosophical Investigations* (Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1953). See also, for example, G. E. M. Anscombe, "Pretending," *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,* supp. vol. 32 (1958), pp. 285–289; Phillipa Foot, "Moral Beliefs," *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,* vol. 59 (1958–1959), pp. 86–89; and George Pitcher, "On Approval," *Philosophical Review,* vol. 67 (1958). See also B. A. O. Williams, "Morality and the Emotions," *Inaugural Lecture,* Bedford College, University of London, 1965. It may be a difficulty with the emotive theory of ethics as presented by C. L. Stevenson in *Ethics and Language* (New Haven, Yale University Press, 1944) that it cannot identify and distinguish the moral from the nonmoral feelings. For a discussion of this question, see W. P. Alston, "Moral Attitudes and Moral Judgments," *Nous,* vol. 2 (1968).

without his voice shaking; and perhaps he cannot suppress certain gestures. If there are such characteristic sensations and behavioral manifestations for a moral feeling, these do not constitute the feeling of guilt, shame, indignation, or whatever. Such characteristic sensations and manifestations are neither necessary nor sufficient in particular instances for someone to feel guilty, ashamed, or indignant. This is not to deny that some characteristic sensations and behavioral manifestations of disturbance may be necessary if one is to be overwhelmed by feelings of guilt, shame, or indignation. But to have these feelings it is often sufficient that a person sincerely say that he feels guilty, ashamed or indignant, and that he is prepared to give an appropriate explanation of why he feels as he does (assuming of course that he accepts this explanation as correct).

This last consideration introduces the main question in distinguishing the moral feelings from other emotions and from each other, namely: (d) What is the definitive type of explanation required for having a moral feeling, and how do these explanations differ from one feeling to another? Thus when we ask someone why he feels guilty, what sort of answer do we want? Certainly not any reply is acceptable. A reference merely to expected punishment is not enough; this might account for fear or anxiety, but not for guilt feelings. Similarly, mention of harms or misadventures that have fallen upon oneself as a consequence of one's past actions explains feelings of regret but not those of guilt, and much less those of remorse. To be sure, fear and anxiety often accompany feelings of guilt for obvious reasons, but these emotions must not be confused with the moral feelings. We should not suppose, then, that the experience of guilt is somehow a mixture of fear, anxiety, and regret. Anxiety and fear are not moral feelings at all, and regret is connected with some view of our own good, being occasioned, say, by failures to further our interests in sensible ways. Even such phenomena as neurotic guilt feelings, and other deviations from the standard case, are accepted as feelings of guilt and not simply as irrational fears and anxieties because of the special type of explanation for the departure from the norm. It is always supposed in such cases that a deeper psychological investigation will uncover (or has uncovered) the relevant similarity to other guilt feelings.

In general, it is a necessary feature of moral feelings, and part of what distinguishes them from the natural attitudes, that the person's explanation of his experience invokes a moral concept and its associated principles. His account of his feeling makes reference to an acknowledged right or wrong. When we question this, we are likely to offer various forms of guilt feelings as counterexamples. This is easy to understand since the earliest forms of guilt feelings are those of authority guilt, and we are unlikely to grow up without having what one may call residue guilt feelings. For example, a person raised in a strict religious sect may have been taught that going to the theater is wrong. While he no longer believes this, he tells us that he still feels guilty when attending the theater. But these are not proper guilt feelings, since he is not about to apologize to anyone, or to resolve not to see another play, and so on. Indeed, he should say rather that he has certain sensations and feelings of uneasiness, and the like, which resemble those which he has when he feels guilty. Assuming, then, the soundness of the contract view, the explanation of some moral feelings relies on principles of right that would be chosen in the original position, while the other moral feelings are related to the concept of goodness. For example, a person feels guilty because he knows that he has taken more than his share (as defined by some just scheme), or has treated others unfairly. Or a person feels ashamed because he has been cowardly and not spoken out. He has failed to live up to a conception of moral worth which he has set himself to achieve (§68). What distinguishes the moral feelings from one another are the principles and faults which their explanations typically invoke. For the most part, the characteristic sensations and behavioral manifestations are the same, being psychological disturbances and having the common features of these.

It is worthwhile to note that the same action may give rise to several moral feelings at once provided that, as is often the case, the appropriate explanation for each one can be given (§67). For example, a person who cheats may feel both guilty and ashamed: guilty because he has violated a trust and unfairly advanced himself, his guilt being in answer to the injuries done to others; ashamed because by resorting to such means he has convicted himself in his own eyes (and in those of others) as weak and untrustworthy, as someone who resorts to unfair and covert means to further his ends. These explanations appeal to different principles and values, thus distinguishing the corresponding feelings; but both explanations frequently apply. We may add here that for a person to have a moral feeling, it is not necessary that everything asserted in his explanation be true; it is sufficient that he accepts the explanation. Someone may be in error, then, in thinking that he has taken more than his share. He may not be guilty. Nevertheless, he feels guilty since his explanation is of the right sort, and although mistaken, the beliefs he expresses are sincere.

Next, there is a group of questions concerning the relation of moral attitudes to action: (e) What are the characteristic intentions, endeavors, and inclinations of a person experiencing a given feeling? What sorts of things does he want to do, or find himself unable to do? An angry man characteristically tries to strike back, or to block the purposes of the person at whom he is angry. When plagued by feelings of guilt, say, a person wishes to act properly in the future and strives to modify his conduct accordingly. He is inclined to admit what he has done and to ask for reinstatement, and to acknowledge and accept reproofs and penalties; and he finds himself less able to condemn others when they behave wrongly. The particular situation will determine which of these dispositions are realized; and we may also suppose that the family of dispositions which may be elicited varies according to the morality of the individual. It is clear, for example, that the typical expressions of guilt and the appropriate explanations will be quite different as the ideals and roles of the morality of association become more complex and demanding; and these feelings in turn will be distinct from the emotions connected with the morality of principles. In justice as fairness, these variations are accounted for in the first instance by the content of the corresponding moral view. The structure of precepts, ideals, and principles shows what sorts of explanations are required.

Further, we can ask: (f) What emotions and responses does a person having a particular feeling expect on the part of other persons? How does he anticipate that they will react toward him, as this is shown, say, in various characteristic distortions in his interpretation of others' conduct toward him? Thus, one who feels guilty, recognizing his action as a transgression of the legitimate claims of others, expects them to resent his conduct and to penalize him in various ways. He also assumes that third parties will be indignant with him. Someone who feels guilty, then, is apprehensive about the resentment and indignation of others, and the uncertainties which thereby arise. By contrast, someone who feels ashamed anticipates derision and contempt. He has fallen short of a standard of excellence, given in to weakness, and shown himself unworthy of association with others who share his ideals. He is apprehensive lest he be cut off and rejected, made an object of scorn and ridicule. Just as the feelings of guilt and shame have different principles in their explanations, they lead us to anticipate different attitudes in other persons. In general, guilt, resentment, and indignation invoke the concept of right, whereas shame, contempt, and derision appeal to the concept of goodness. And these remarks extend in the obvious way to feelings of duty and obligation (if there are such), and to proper pride and a sense of one's own worth.

Finally, we can ask: (g) What are the characteristic temptations to

actions that give rise to the moral feeling and how is the feeling typically resolved? Here again there are marked differences between the moral emotions. Feelings of guilt and shame have different settings and are overcome in distinct ways, and these variations reflect the defining principles with which they are connected and their peculiar psychological bases. Thus, for example, guilt is relieved by reparation and the forgiveness that permits reconciliation; whereas shame is undone by proofs of defects made good, by a renewed confidence in the excellence of one's person. It is also clear, for example, that resentment and indignation have their characteristic resolutions, since the first is aroused by what we regard as wrongs done to ourselves, the second is concerned with wrongs done to others.

Yet the contrasts between the feelings of guilt and shame are so striking that it is helpful to note how they fit in with the distinctions made between different aspects of morality. As we have seen, a breach of any virtue may give rise to shame; it suffices that one prizes the form of action among one's excellences (§67). Analogously, a wrong can always occasion guilt whenever others are in some way harmed, or their rights violated. Thus guilt and shame reflect the concern with others and with one's person that must be present in all moral conduct. Nevertheless, some virtues, and so those moralities that emphasize them, are more typical of the standpoint of one feeling than the other, and therefore are more closely connected with it. Thus in particular, the moralities of supererogation provide the stage for shame; for they represent the higher forms of moral excellence, the love of humankind and self-command, and in choosing them one risks failure from their very nature. It would be a mistake, however, to emphasize the perspective of one feeling more than the other in the complete moral conception. For the theory of right and justice is founded on the notion of reciprocity which reconciles the points of view of the self and of others as equal moral persons. This reciprocity has the consequence that both perspectives characterize moral thought and feeling, usually in roughly even measure. Neither concern for others nor for self has priority, for all are equal; and the balance between persons is given by the principles of justice. And where this balance moves to one side, as with the moralities of supererogation, it does so from the election of self, which freely takes on the larger part. Thus while we may think of the points of view of the self and of others as characteristic of some moralities historically, or of certain perspectives within a full conception, a complete moral doctrine includes both. All by themselves, a morality of shame or of guilt is but a part of a moral view.

In these remarks I have stressed two main points. First of all, the moral attitudes are not to be identified with characteristic sensations and behavioral manifestations, even if these exist. Moral feelings require certain types of explanations. Thus, second, the moral attitudes involve the acceptance of specific moral virtues; and the principles which define these virtues are used to account for the corresponding feelings. The judgments that elucidate different emotions are distinguished from one another by the standards cited in their explanation. Guilt and shame, remorse and regret, indignation and resentment, either appeal to principles belonging to different parts of morality or invoke them from contrasting points of view. An ethical theory must explain and find a place for these distinctions, although presumably each theory will try to do so in its own way.

#### 74. THE CONNECTION BETWEEN MORAL AND NATURAL ATTITUDES

There is a further aspect of moral attitudes that I have noted in the sketch of the development of the sense of justice, namely, their connection with certain natural attitudes.18 Thus in examining a moral feeling we should ask: what if any are the natural attitudes to which it is related? Now there are two questions here, one the converse of the other. The first asks about the natural attitudes that are shown to be absent when a person fails to have certain moral feelings. Whereas the second asks which natural attitudes are evidenced to be present when someone experiences a moral emotion. In sketching the three stages of morality I have been concerned only with the first question, since its converse raises other and more difficult problems. I have held that, in the context of the authority situation, the child's natural attitudes of love and trust for those in authority lead to feelings of (authority) guilt when he violates the injunctions addressed to him. The absence of these moral feelings would evidence a lack of these natural ties. Similarly, within the framework of the morality of association, the natural attitudes of friendship and mutual trust give rise to feelings of guilt for not fulfilling the duties and obligations recognized by the group. The absence of these feelings would imply the absence of these attachments. These propositions must not be mistaken for their converses, for while feelings of indignation and guilt, say, can often

<sup>18.</sup> Throughout this section, and indeed on the subject of the moral emotions generally, I am very much indebted to David Sachs.

be taken as evidence for such affections, there may be other explanations. In general, moral principles are affirmed for various reasons and their acceptance is normally sufficient for the moral feelings. To be sure, on the contract theory principles of right and justice have a certain content, and as we have just seen, there is a sense in which acting in accordance with them can be interpreted as acting from a concern for mankind, or for the good of other persons. Whether this fact shows that one acts in part from certain natural attitudes, especially as these involve attachments to particular individuals, and not simply from the general forms of sympathy and benevolence, is a question that I shall leave aside here. Certainly the preceding account of the development of morality supposes that affection for particular persons plays an essential part in the acquisition of morality. But how far these attitudes are required for later moral motivation can be left open, although it would, I think, be surprising if these attachments were not to some degree necessary.

Now the connection between the natural attitudes and the moral sentiments may be expressed as follows: these sentiments and attitudes are both ordered families of characteristic dispositions, and these families overlap in such a manner that the absence of certain moral feelings evidences the absence of certain natural ties. Or alternatively, the presence of certain natural attachments gives rise to a liability to certain moral emotions once the requisite moral development has taken place. We can see how this is so by an example. If A cares for B, then failing a special explanation A is afraid for B when B is in danger and tries to come to B's assistance. Again, if C plans to treat B unjustly, A is indignant with C and attempts to prevent his plans from succeeding. In both cases, A is disposed to protect B's interests. Further, unless there are special circumstances, A is joyful when together with B, and when B suffers injury or dies, A is stricken with grief. If the injury to B is A's responsibility, A will feel remorse. Love is a sentiment, a hierarchy of dispositions to experience and to manifest these primary emotions as the occasion elicits and to act in the appropriate way.19 To confirm the connection between the natural attitudes and the moral sentiments one simply notes that the disposition on A's part to feel remorse when he injures B, or guilt when he violates B's legitimate claims, or A's disposition to feel indignation when C seeks to deny B's right, are as closely related psychologically with the natural attitudes of love as the disposition to be

<sup>19.</sup> On this point, see A. F. Shand, *The Foundations of Character,* 2nd ed. (London, Macmillan, 1920), pp. 55f.

joyful in the other's presence, or to feel sorrow when he suffers. The moral sentiments are in some ways more complex. In their complete form they presuppose an understanding and an acceptance of certain principles and an ability to judge in accordance with them. But assuming these things, the liability to moral feelings seems to be as much a part of the natural sentiments as the tendency to be joyful, or the liability to grief. Love sometimes expresses itself in sorrow, at other times in indignation. Either one without the other would be equally unusual. The content of rational moral principles is such as to render these connections intelligible.

Now one main consequence of this doctrine is that the moral feelings are a normal feature of human life. We could not do away with them without at the same time eliminating certain natural attitudes. Among persons who never acted in accordance with their duty of justice except as reasons of self-interest and expediency dictated there would be no bonds of friendship and mutual trust. For when these attachments exist, other reasons are acknowledged for acting fairly. This much seems reasonably obvious. But it also follows from what has been said that, barring self-deception, egoists are incapable of feeling resentment and indignation. If either of two egoists deceives the other and this is found out, neither of them has a ground for complaint. They do not accept the principles of justice, or any other conception that is reasonable from the standpoint of the original position; nor do they experience any inhibition from guilt feelings for breaches of their duties. As we have seen, resentment and indignation are moral feelings and therefore they presuppose an explanation by reference to an acceptance of the principles of right and justice. But by hypothesis the appropriate explanations cannot be given. To deny that self-interested persons are incapable of resentment and indignation is not of course to say that they cannot be angry and annoyed with one another. A person without a sense of justice may be enraged at someone who fails to act fairly. But anger and annoyance are distinct from indignation and resentment; they are not, as the latter are, moral emotions. Nor should it be denied that egoists may want others to recognize the bonds of friendship and to treat them in a friendly way. But these desires are not to be mistaken for ties of affection that lead one to make sacrifices for one's friends. No doubt there are difficulties in distinguishing between resentment and anger, and between apparent and real friendship. Certainly the overt manifestations and actions may seem the same when viewing a limited span of conduct. Yet in the longer run the difference can usually be made out.

One may say, then, that a person who lacks a sense of justice, and who would never act as justice requires except as self-interest and expediency prompt, not only is without ties of friendship, affection, and mutual trust, but is incapable of experiencing resentment and indignation. He lacks certain natural attitudes and moral feelings of a particularly elementary kind. Put another way, one who lacks a sense of justice lacks certain fundamental attitudes and capacities included under the notion of humanity. Now the moral feelings are admittedly unpleasant, in some extended sense of unpleasant; but there is no way for us to avoid a liability to them without disfiguring ourselves. This liability is the price of love and trust, of friendship and affection, and of a devotion to institutions and traditions from which we have benefited and which serve the general interests of mankind. Further, assuming that persons are possessed of interests and aspirations of their own, and that they are prepared in the pursuit of their own ends and ideals to press their claims on one another—that is, so long as the conditions giving rise to questions of justice obtain among them it is inevitable that, given temptation and passion, this liability will be realized. And since being moved by ends and ideals of excellence implies a liability to humiliation and shame, and an absence of a liability to humiliation and shame implies a lack of such ends and ideals, one can say of shame and humiliation also that they are a part of the notion of humanity. Now the fact that one who lacks a sense of justice, and thereby a liability to guilt, lacks certain fundamental attitudes and capacities is not to be taken as a reason for acting as justice dictates. But it has this significance: by understanding what it would be like not to have a sense of justice—that it would be to lack part of our humanity too—we are led to accept our having this sentiment.

It follows that the moral sentiments are a normal part of human life. One cannot do away with them without at the same time dismantling the natural attitudes as well. And we have also seen (§§30, 72) that the moral sentiments are continuous with these attitudes in the sense that the love of mankind and the desire to uphold the common good include the principles of right and justice as necessary to define their object. None of this is to deny that our existing moral feelings may be in many respects irrational and injurious to our good. Freud is right in his view that these attitudes are often punitive and blind, incorporating many of the harsher aspects of the authority situation in which they were first acquired. Resentment and indignation, feelings of guilt and remorse, a sense of duty and the censure of others, often take perverse and destructive forms, and blunt without reason human spontaneity and enjoyment. When I say that moral attitudes are part of our humanity, I mean those attitudes that appeal to sound principles of right and justice in their explanation. The reasonableness of the underlying ethical conception is a necessary condition; and so the appropriateness of moral sentiments to our nature is determined by the principles that would be consented to in the original position.20 These principles regulate moral education and the expression of moral approval and disapproval, just as they govern the design of institutions. Yet even if the sense of justice is the normal outgrowth of natural human attitudes within a well-ordered society, it is still true that our present moral feelings are liable to be unreasonable and capricious. However, one of the virtues of a well-ordered society is that, since arbitrary authority has disappeared, its members suffer much less from the burdens of oppressive conscience.
