---
images: []
order: 35
title: 80. THE PROBLEM OF ENVY
---

Throughout I have assumed that the persons in the original position are not moved by certain psychological propensities (§25). A rational individual is not subject to envy, at least when the differences between himself and others are not thought to be the result of injustice and do not exceed certain limits. Nor are the parties influenced by different attitudes toward risk and uncertainty, or by various tendencies to dominate or to submit, and the like. These special psychologies I have also imagined to be behind the veil of ignorance along with the parties' knowledge of their conception of the good. One explanation for these stipulations is that as far as possible the choice of a conception of justice should not be affected by accidental contingencies. The principles adopted should be invariant with respect to differences in these inclinations for the same reason that we want them to hold irrespective of individual preferences and social circumstances.

These assumptions tie in with the Kantian interpretation of justice as fairness and greatly simplify the argument from the standpoint of the original position. The parties are not swayed by individual differences in these propensities, thereby avoiding the complications in the bargaining process that would result. Without rather definite information about which configuration of attitudes existed, one might not be able to say what agreement if any would be reached. In each case it would be contingent upon the particular hypothesis laid down. Unless we could show some distinctive merit from a moral point of view in the postulated array of special psychologies, the principles adopted would be arbitrary, no longer the outcome of reasonable conditions. And since envy is generally regarded as something to be avoided and feared, at least when it becomes intense, it seems desirable that, if possible, the choice of principles should not be influenced by this trait. Therefore, for reasons both of simplicity and moral theory, I have assumed an absence of envy and a lack of knowledge of the special psychologies.

Nevertheless these inclinations do exist and in some way they must be reckoned with. Thus I have split the argument for the principles of justice into two parts: the first part proceeds on the presumptions just mentioned, and is illustrated by most of the argument so far; the second part asks whether the well-ordered society corresponding to the conception adopted will actually generate feelings of envy and patterns of psychological attitudes that will undermine the arrangements it counts to be just. At first we reason as if there is no problem of envy and the special psychologies; and then having ascertained which principles would be settled upon, we check to see whether just institutions so defined are likely to arouse and encourage these propensities to such an extent that the social system becomes unworkable and incompatible with human good. If so, the adoption of the conception of justice must be reconsidered. But should the inclinations engendered support just arrangements, or be easily accommodated by them, the first part of the argument is confirmed. The essential advantage of the two-step procedure is that no particular constellation of attitudes is taken as given. We are simply checking the reasonableness of our initial assumptions and the consequences we have drawn from them in the light of the constraints imposed by the general facts of our world.

I shall discuss the problem of envy as an illustration of the way in

which the special psychologies enter into the theory of justice. While each special psychology raises no doubt different questions, the general procedure may be much the same. I begin by noting the reason why envy poses a problem, namely, the fact that the inequalities sanctioned by the difference principle may be so great as to arouse envy to a socially dangerous extent. To clarify this possibility it is useful to distinguish between general and particular envy. The envy experienced by the least advantaged towards those better situated is normally general envy in the sense that they envy the more favored for the kinds of goods and not for the particular objects they possess. The upper classes say are envied for their greater wealth and opportunity; those envying them want similar advantages for themselves. By contrast, particular envy is typical of rivalry and competition. Those who lose out in the quest for office and honor, or for the affections of another, are liable to envy the success of their rivals and to covet the very same thing that they have won. Our problem then is whether the principles of justice, and especially the difference principle with fair equality of opportunity, is likely to engender in practice too much destructive general envy.

I now turn to the definition of envy that seems appropriate for this question. To fix ideas, suppose that the necessary interpersonal comparisons are made in terms of the objective primary goods, liberty and opportunity, income and wealth, which for simplicity I have normally used to define expectations in applying the difference principle. Then we may think of envy as the propensity to view with hostility the greater good of others even though their being more fortunate than we are does not detract from our advantages. We envy persons whose situation is superior to ours (estimated by some agreed index of goods as noted above) and we are willing to deprive them of their greater benefits even if it is necessary to give up something ourselves. When others are aware of our envy, they may become jealous of their better circumstances and anxious to take precautions against the hostile acts to which our envy makes us prone. So understood envy is collectively disadvantageous: the individual who envies another is prepared to do things that make them both worse off, if only the discrepancy between them is sufficiently reduced. Thus Kant, whose definition I have pretty much followed, quite properly discusses envy as one of the vices of hating mankind.5

This definition calls for comment. First of all, as Kant observes, there

<sup>5.</sup> *The Metaphysics of Morals,* pt. II, §36. In the edition trans. M. G. Gregor (New York, Harper and Row, 1964), p. 127. Aristotle notes that envy and spite as passions do not admit of a mean; their names already imply badness. *Nicomachean Ethics,* 1107a11.

are many occasions when we openly speak of the greater good of others as enviable. Thus we may remark upon the enviable harmony and happiness of a marriage or a family. Similarly, one might say to another that one envies his greater opportunities or attainments. In these cases, those of benign envy as I shall refer to them, there is no ill will intended or expressed. We do not wish, for example, that the marriage or family should be less happy or harmonious. By these conventional expressions we are affirming the value of certain things that others have. We are indicating that, although we possess no similar good of equal value, they are indeed worth striving for. Those to whom we address these remarks are expected to receive them as a kind of praise and not as a foretaste of our hostility. A somewhat different case is that of emulative envy which leads us to try to achieve what others have. The sight of their greater good moves us to strive in socially beneficial ways for similar things for ourselves. Thus envy proper, in contrast with benign envy which we freely express, is a form of rancor that tends to harm both its object and its subject. It is what emulative envy may become under certain conditions of defeat and sense of failure.

A further point is that envy is not a moral feeling. No moral principle need be cited in its explanation. It is sufficient to say that the better situation of others catches our attention. We are downcast by their good fortune and no longer value as highly what we have; and this sense of hurt and loss arouses our rancor and hostility. Thus one must be careful not to conflate envy and resentment. For resentment is a moral feeling. If we resent our having less than others, it must be because we think that their being better off is the result of unjust institutions, or wrongful conduct on their part. Those who express resentment must be prepared to show why certain institutions are unjust or how others have injured them. What marks off envy from the moral feelings is the different way in which it is accounted for, the sort of perspective from which the situation is viewed (§73).

We should note also the nonmoral feelings connected with envy but not to be mistaken for it. In particular, jealousy and grudgingness are reverse, so to speak, to envy. A person who is better off may wish those less fortunate than he to stay in their place. He is jealous of his superior position and begrudges them the greater advantages that would put them on a level with himself. And should this propensity extend to denying

<sup>6.</sup> For the distinction between emulation and envy, see Bishop Butler, *Sermons*, I, in *British Moralists*, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge (Oxford, 1897), vol. I, p. 205.

them benefits that he does not need and cannot use himself, then he is moved by spite.<sup>7</sup> These inclinations are collectively harmful in the way that envy is, since the grudging and spiteful man is willing to give up something to maintain the distance between himself and others.

So far I have considered envy and grudgingness as vices. As we have seen, the moral virtues are among the broadly based traits of character which it is rational for persons to want in one another as associates (§66). Thus vices are broadly based traits that are not wanted, spitefulness and envy being clear cases, since they are to everyone's detriment. The parties will surely prefer conceptions of justice the realization of which does not arouse these propensities. We are normally expected to forbear from the actions to which they prompt us and to take the steps necessary to rid ourselves of them. Yet sometimes the circumstances evoking envy are so compelling that given human beings as they are no one can reasonably be asked to overcome his rancorous feelings. A person's lesser position as measured by the index of objective primary goods may be so great as to wound his self-respect; and given his situation, we may sympathize with his sense of loss. Indeed, we can resent being made envious, for society may permit such large disparities in these goods that under existing social conditions these differences cannot help but cause a loss of self-esteem. For those suffering this hurt, envious feelings are not irrational; the satisfaction of their rancor would make them better off. When envy is a reaction to the loss of self-respect in circumstances where it would be unreasonable to expect someone to feel differently, I shall say that it is excusable. Since self-respect is the main primary good, the parties would not agree, I shall assume, to count this sort of subjective loss as irrelevant. Therefore the question is whether a basic structure which satisfies the principles of justice is likely to arouse so much excusable envy that the choice of these principles should be reconsidered.

#### 81. ENVY AND EQUALITY

We are now ready to examine the likelihood of excusable general envy in a well-ordered society. I shall only discuss this case, since our problem is whether the principles of justice are a reasonable undertaking in view of the propensities of human beings, in particular their aversion to dispari-

<sup>7.</sup> Aristotle, *Nicomachean Ethics*, 1108bl–6, characterizes spite as being pleased at the bad fortune of others, whether deserved or not. For the idea that jealousy, grudgingness, and spite are the reverse of envy, the feelings of those envied and who possess what is wanted, I am indebted to G. M. Foster.

ties in objective goods. Now I assume that the main psychological root of the liability to envy is a lack of self-confidence in our own worth combined with a sense of impotence. Our way of life is without zest and we feel powerless to alter it or to acquire the means of doing what we still want to do. By contrast, someone sure of the worth of his plan of life and his ability to carry it out is not given to rancor nor is he jealous of his good fortune. Even if he could, he has no desire to level down the advantages of others at some expense to himself. This hypothesis implies that the least favored tend to be more envious of the better situation of the more favored the less secure their self-respect and the greater their feeling that they cannot improve their prospects. Similarly the particular envy aroused by competition and rivalry is likely to be stronger the worse one's defeat, for the blow to one's self-confidence is more severe and the loss may seem irretrievable. It is general envy, however, that mainly concerns us here.

There are three conditions, I assume, that encourage hostile outbreaks of envy. The first of these is the psychological condition we have just noted: persons lack a sure confidence in their own value and in their ability to do anything worthwhile. Second (and one of two social conditions), many occasions arise when this psychological condition is experienced as painful and humiliating. The discrepancy between oneself and others is made visible by the social structure and style of life of one's society. The less fortunate are therefore often forcibly reminded of their situation, sometimes leading them to an even lower estimation of themselves and their mode of living. And third, they see their social position as allowing no constructive alternative to opposing the favored circumstances of the more advantaged. To alleviate their feelings of anguish and inferiority, they believe they have no choice but to impose a loss on those better placed even at some cost to themselves, unless of course they are to relapse into resignation and apathy.

Now many aspects of a well-ordered society work to mitigate if not to prevent these conditions. In regard to the first condition, it is clear that, although it is a psychological state, social institutions are a basic instigating cause. But I have maintained that the contract conception of justice

<sup>8.</sup> This sort of hypothesis has been proposed by various writers. See, for example, Nietzsche, *On the Genealogy of Morals*, trans. Walter Kaufmann and R. J. Hollingdale (New York, Random House, 1967), I, secs. 10, 11, 13, 14, 16; II, sec. 11; III, secs. 14–16; and Max Scheler, *Ressentiment*, trans. W. W. Holdheim (Glencoe, Ill., The Free Press, 1961), pp. 45–50. For a discussion of Nietzsche's notion of ressentiment, see Walter Kaufmann, *Nietzsche* (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1950), pp. 325–331.

supports the self-esteem of citizens generally more firmly than other political principles. In the public forum each person is treated with the respect due to a sovereign equal; and everyone has the same basic rights that would be acknowledged in an initial situation regarded as fair. The members of the community have a common sense of justice and they are bound by ties of civic friendship. I have already discussed these points in connection with stability (§§75–76). We can add that the greater advantages of some are in return for compensating benefits for the less favored; and no one supposes that those who have a larger share are more deserving from a moral point of view. Happiness according to virtue is rejected as a principle of distribution (§48). And so likewise is the principle of perfection: regardless of the excellences that persons or associations display, their claims to social resources are always adjudicated by principles of mutual justice (§50). For all these reasons the less fortunate have no cause to consider themselves inferior and the public principles generally accepted underwrite their self-assurance. The disparities between themselves and others, whether absolute or relative, should be easier for them to accept than in other forms of polity.

Turning to the second condition, both the absolute and the relative differences allowed in a well-ordered society are probably less than those that have often prevailed. Although in theory the difference principle permits indefinitely large inequalities in return for small gains to the less favored, the spread of income and wealth should not be excessive in practice, given the requisite background institutions (§26). Moreover the plurality of associations in a well-ordered society, each with its secure internal life, tends to reduce the visibility, or at least the painful visibility, of variations in men's prospects. For we tend to compare our circumstances with others in the same or in a similar group as ourselves, or in positions that we regard as relevant to our aspirations. The various associations in society tend to divide it into so many noncomparing groups, the discrepancies between these divisions not attracting the kind of attention which unsettles the lives of those less well placed. And this ignoring of differences in wealth and circumstance is made easier by the fact that when citizens do meet one another, as they must in public affairs at least, the principles of equal justice are acknowledged. Moreover in everyday life the natural duties are honored so that the more advantaged do not make an ostentatious display of their higher estate calculated to demean the condition of those who have less. After all, if the disposing conditions for envy are removed, so probably are those for jealousy, grudgingness, and spite, the converses of envy. When the less fortunate segments of society lack the one, the more fortunate will lack the other. Taken together these features of a well-ordered regime diminish the number of occasions when the less favored are likely to experience their situation as impoverished and humiliating. Even if they have some liability to envy, it may never be strongly evoked.

Finally, considering the last condition, it would seem that a well-or-dered society as much as any other offers constructive alternatives to hostile outbreaks of envy. The problem of general envy anyway does not force us to reconsider the choice of the principles of justice. As for particular envy, to a certain extent it is endemic to human life; being associated with rivalry, it may exist in any society. The more specific problem for political justice is how pervasive are the rancor and jealousy aroused by the quest for office and position, and whether it is likely to distort the justice of institutions. It is difficult to settle this matter in the absence of the more detailed knowledge of social forms available at the legislative stage. But there seems to be no reason why the hazards of particular envy should be worse in a society regulated by justice as fairness than by any other conception.

I conclude, then, that the principles of justice are not likely to arouse excusable general envy (nor particular envy either) to a troublesome extent. By this test, the conception of justice again seems relatively stable. I should now like to examine briefly the possible connections between envy and equality, taking equality to be defined in various ways as specified by the theory of justice in question. While there are many forms of equality, and egalitarianism admits of degrees, there are conceptions of justice that are recognizably egalitarian, even though certain significant disparities are permitted. The two principles of justice fall, I assume, under this heading.

Many conservative writers have contended that the tendency to equality in modern social movements is the expression of envy. In this way they seek to discredit this trend, attributing it to collectively harmful impulses. Before this thesis can be seriously entertained, however, one must first argue that the form of equality objected to is indeed unjust and bound in the end to make everyone including the less advantaged worse off. Yet to insist upon equality as the two principles of justice define it is not to give voice to envy. This is shown by the content of these principles

<sup>9.</sup> See, for example, Helmut Schoeck, *Envy: A Theory of Social Behavior*, trans. Michael Glenny and Betty Ross (London, Secker and Warburg, 1969). Chapters XIV–XV contain many references. At one point even Marx thought of the first stage of communism as the expression of envy. See *Early Writings*, pp. 153f.

and the characterization of envy. It is also evident from the nature of the parties in the original position: the conception of justice is chosen under conditions where by hypothesis no one is moved by rancor and spite (§25). Thus the claims to equality supported by the two principles do not spring from these feelings. The claims of those affirming the principles may sometimes express resentment, but this as we have seen is another matter.

In order to show that the principles of justice are based in part on envy it would have to be established that one or more of the conditions of the original position arise from this propensity. Since the question of stability does not force a reconsideration of the choice already made, the case for the influence of envy must be made by reference to the first part of the theory. But each of the stipulations of the original position has a justification which makes no mention of envy. For example, one invokes the function of moral principles as being a suitably general and public way of ordering claims (§23). To be sure, there may be forms of equality that do spring from envy. Strict egalitarianism, the doctrine which insists upon an equal distribution of all primary goods, conceivably derives from this propensity. What this means is that this conception of equality would be adopted in the original position only if the parties are assumed to be sufficiently envious. This possibility in no way affects the two principles of justice. The different conception of equality which they define is acknowledged on the supposition that envy does not exist.<sup>10</sup>

The importance of separating envy from the moral feelings can be seen from several examples. Suppose first that envy is held to be pervasive in poor peasant societies. The reason for this, it may be suggested, is the general belief that the aggregate of social wealth is more or less fixed, so that one person's gain is another's loss. The social system is interpreted, it might be said, as a naturally established and unchangeable zero-sum game. Now actually, if this belief were widespread and the stock of goods were generally thought to be given, then a strict opposition of interests would be assumed to obtain. In this case, it would be correct to think that justice requires equal shares. Social wealth is not viewed as the outcome of mutually advantageous cooperation and so there is no fair basis for an unequal division of advantages. What is said to be envy may in fact be resentment which might or might not prove to be justified.

Freud's speculations about the origin of the sense of justice suffer from the same defect. He remarks that this sentiment is the outgrowth of envy

<sup>10.</sup> In this and the next several paragraphs I am indebted to R. A. Schultz for helpful suggestions.

and jealousy. As some members of the social group jealously strive to protect their advantages, the less favored are moved by envy to take them away. Eventually everyone recognizes that they cannot maintain their hostile attitudes toward one another without injury to themselves. Thus as a compromise they settle upon the demand of equal treatment. The sense of justice is a reaction-formation: what was originally jealousy and envy is transformed into a social feeling, the sense of justice that insists upon equality for all. Freud believes that this process is exemplified in the nursery and in many other social circumstances.11 Yet the plausibility of his account assumes that the initial attitudes are correctly described. With a few changes, the underlying features of the examples he depicts correspond to those of the original position. That persons have opposing interests and seek to advance their own conception of the good is not at all the same thing as their being moved by envy and jealousy. As we have seen, this sort of opposition gives rise to the circumstances of justice. Thus if children compete for the attention and affection of their parents, to which one might say they justly have an equal claim, one cannot assert that their sense of justice springs from jealousy and envy. Certainly children are often envious and jealous; and no doubt their moral notions are so primitive that the necessary distinctions are not grasped by them. But waiving these difficulties, we could equally well say that their social feeling arises from resentment, from a sense that they are unfairly treated.12 And similarly one could say to conservative writers that it is mere grudgingness when those better circumstanced reject the claims of the less advantaged to greater equality. But this contention also calls for careful argument. None of these charges and countercharges can be given credence without first examining the conceptions of justice sincerely held by individuals and their understanding of the social situation in order to see how far these claims are indeed founded on these motives.

None of these remarks is intended to deny that the appeal to justice is often a mask for envy. What is said to be resentment may really be rancor. But rationalizations of this sort present a further problem. In addition to showing that a person's conception of justice is not itself founded on envy, we must determine whether the principles of justice cited in his explanation are sincerely held as this is shown in their being applied by him to other cases in which he is not involved, or even better, in which he

<sup>11.</sup> See *Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego,* rev. ed., trans. James Strachey (London, The Hogarth Press, 1959), pp. 51f.

<sup>12.</sup> See Rousseau, *Emile,* trans. Barbara Foxley (London, J. M. Dent and Sons, 1911), pp. 61–63. And also J. N. Shklar, *Men and Citizens* (Cambridge, The University Press, 1969), p. 49.

would suffer a loss from their being followed. Freud means to assert more than the truism that envy often masquerades as resentment. He wants to say that the energy that motivates the sense of justice is borrowed from that of envy and jealousy, and that without this energy, there would be no (or much less) desire to give justice. Conceptions of justice have few attractions for us other than those deriving from these and similar feelings. It is this claim that is supported by erroneously conflating envy and resentment.

Unhappily the problem of the other special psychologies must go untouched. They should in any case be treated in much the same way as envy. One tries to assess the configuration of attitudes toward risk and uncertainty, domination and submission, and the like, that just institutions are likely to generate, and then to estimate whether they are likely to render these institutions unworkable or ineffective. We also need to ask whether, from the point of view of the persons in the original position, the conception chosen is acceptable or at least tolerable whatever our special proclivities may turn out to be. The most favorable alternative is that which allows a place for all these different tendencies insofar as they are likely to be encouraged by a just basic structure. There is a division of labor so to speak between persons with contrary inclinations. Of course some of these attitudes may earn a premium in the way that certain trained abilities do, as for example the willingness to be adventuresome and to take unusual risks. But if so, the problem is on all fours with the return to natural assets and it is covered by the discussion of distributive shares (§47). What a social system must not do clearly is to encourage propensities and aspirations that it is bound to repress and disappoint. So long as the pattern of special psychologies elicited by society either supports its arrangements or can be reasonably accommodated by them, there is no need to reconsider the choice of a conception of justice. I believe, though I have not shown, that the principles of justice as fairness pass this test.

#### 82. THE GROUNDS FOR THE PRIORITY OF LIBERTY

We have already considered the meaning of the priority of liberty and how it is incorporated into various rules of precedence (§§39, 46). Now that all the main elements of the contract view are before us, the main grounds for this priority can be surveyed. I have supposed that if the persons in the original position know that their basic liberties can be effectively exercised, they will not exchange a lesser liberty for greater economic advantages (§26). It is only when social conditions do not allow the full establishment of these rights that one can acknowledge their restriction. The equal liberties can be denied only when it is necessary to change the quality of civilization so that in due course everyone can enjoy these freedoms. The effective realization of all these liberties in a well-ordered society is the long-run tendency of the two principles and rules of priority when they are consistently followed under reasonably favorable conditions. Our problem here, then, is to summarize and arrange the reasons for the precedence of liberty in a well-ordered society as seen from the point of view of the original position.

Let us begin by recalling the reasons contained in the first part of the argument for the two principles. A well-ordered society is defined as one effectively regulated by a public conception of justice (§69). The members of such a society are, and view themselves as, free and equal moral persons. That is, they each have, and view themselves as having, fundamental aims and interests in the name of which they think it legitimate to make claims on one another; and they each have, and view themselves as having, a right to equal respect and consideration in determining the principles by which the basic structure of their society is to be governed. They also have a sense of justice that normally governs their conduct. The original position is specified to embody the appropriate reciprocity and equality between persons so conceived; and given that their fundamental aims and interests are protected by the liberties covered by the first principle, they give this principle priority. The religious interest as guaranteed by equal liberty of conscience was discussed as an example (§§33–35). In this connection, one should keep in mind that the parties seek to secure some particular fundamental interest, even though, given the veil of ignorance, only the general nature of this interest is known to them, for example, that it is a religious interest. Their aim is not merely to be permitted to practice some religion or other, but to practice some definite religion, that is, their religion, whatever it turns out to be (§28). In order to secure their unknown but particular interests from the original position, they are led, in view of the strains of commitment (§29), to give precedence to the basic liberties.

A well-ordered society also realizes the parties' highest-order interest in how their other interests, including even their fundamental ones, are shaped and regulated by social institutions (§26). The parties conceive of themselves as free persons who can revise and alter their final ends and who give priority to preserving their liberty in this respect. The manner in which the principles of justice govern the basic structure, as illustrated by the account of autonomy and objectivity (§78), shows that this highest-order interest is achieved in a well-ordered society.

Thus the persons in the original position are moved by a certain hierarchy of interests. They must first secure their highest-order interest and fundamental aims (only the general form of which is known to them), and this fact is reflected in the precedence they give to liberty; the acquisition of means that enable them to advance their other desires and ends has a subordinate place. Even though the fundamental interests in liberty have a definite objective, namely, the effective establishment of the basic liberties, these interests may not always appear to be controlling. The realization of these interests may necessitate certain social conditions and degree of fulfillment of needs and material wants, and this explains why the basic liberties can sometimes be restricted. But once the required social conditions and level of satisfaction of needs and material wants is attained, as they are in a well-ordered society under favorable circumstances, the higher-order interests are regulative from then on. Indeed, as Mill supposed, these interests become more intense as the situation of society enables them to be expressed effectively, so that eventually they are regulative and reveal their prior place.13 The basic structure is then to secure the free internal life of the various communities of interests in which persons and groups seek to achieve, in forms of social union consistent with equal liberty, the ends and excellences to which they are drawn (§79). People want to exercise control over the laws and rules that govern their association, either by directly taking part themselves in its affairs or indirectly through representatives with whom they are affiliated by ties of culture and social situation.

So much for the grounds of the precedence of liberty covered in the first part of the argument for the two principles of justice. We must now turn to the second part of the argument and ask whether this precedence will be undermined by the various feelings and attitudes that are likely to be generated within a well-ordered society (§80). Now it may seem that even when the essential needs are satisfied and the requisite material means are attained, people's concern for their relative position in the distribution of wealth will persist. Thus if we suppose that everyone

<sup>13.</sup> See J. S. Mill, *Principles of Political Economy,* ed. by W. S. Ashley (London, Longmans Green, 1909), p. 210. The reference is to the first part of the last paragraph of §3 of ch. 1 of bk. II. If we read this passage to imply the notion of a hierarchy of interests, which leads to a lexical ordering, the view I express in the text is essentially Mill's. His contention here fits the passage in *Utilitarianism,* ch. II, pars. 6–8, which was cited along with other references in footnote 23 of ch. I.

wants a greater proportionate share, the result could be a growing desire for material abundance all the same. Since each strives for an end that cannot be collectively attained, society might conceivably become more and more preoccupied with raising productivity and improving economic efficiency. And these objectives might become so dominant as to undermine the precedence of liberty. Some have objected to the tendency to equality on precisely this ground, that it is thought to arouse in individuals an obsession with their relative share of social wealth. But while it is true that in a well-ordered society there is presumably a trend to greater equality, its members take little interest in their relative position as such. As we have seen, they are not much affected by envy and jealousy, and for the most part they do what seems best to them as judged by their own plan of life, and those of their associates, without being dismayed by the greater amenities and enjoyments of others socially more distant. Thus there are no strong propensities prompting them to curtail their liberties for the sake of greater absolute or relative economic welfare.

Of course, it does not follow that in a just society everyone is unconcerned with matters of status. The account of self-respect as perhaps the main primary good has stressed the great significance of how we think others value us. But in a well-ordered society the need for status is met by the public recognition of just institutions, together with the full and diverse internal life of the many free communities of interests that the equal liberties allow. The basis for self-respect in a just society is not then one's income share but the publicly affirmed distribution of fundamental rights and liberties. And this distribution being equal, everyone has a similar and secure status when they meet to conduct the common affairs of the wider society. No one is inclined to look beyond the constitutional affirmation of equality for further political ways of securing his status. Nor, on the other hand, are men disposed to acknowledge a less than equal liberty. For one thing, doing this would put them at a disadvantage and weaken their political position. It would also have the effect of publicly establishing their inferiority as defined by the basic structure of society. This subordinate ranking in public life would indeed be humiliating and destructive of self-esteem. And so by acquiescing in a less than equal liberty one might lose on both counts. This is particularly likely to be true as a society becomes more just, since equal rights and the public attitudes of mutual respect have an essential place in maintaining a political balance and in assuring citizens of their own worth. Thus while the social and economic differences between the various sectors of society, the noncomparing groups as we may think of them, are not likely to generate animosity, the hardships arising from political and civic inequality, and from cultural and ethnic discrimination, cannot be easily accepted. When it is the position of equal citizenship that answers to the need for status, the precedence of the equal liberties becomes all the more necessary. Having chosen a conception of justice that seeks to eliminate the significance of relative economic and social advantages as supports for men's self-confidence, it is essential that the priority of liberty be firmly maintained.

In a well-ordered society then self-respect is secured by the public affirmation of the status of equal citizenship for all; the distribution of material means is left to take care of itself in accordance with pure procedural justice regulated by just background institutions which narrow the range of inequalities so that excusable envy does not arise. Now this way of dealing with the problem of status has several advantages. Thus, suppose that how one is valued by others did depend upon one's relative place in the distribution of income and wealth. In this case having a higher status implies having more material means than a larger fraction of society. Everyone cannot have the highest status, and to improve one person's position is to lower that of someone else. Social cooperation to increase the conditions of self-respect is impossible. The means of status, so to speak, are fixed, and each man's gain is another's loss. Clearly this situation is a great misfortune. Persons are set at odds with one another in the pursuit of their self-esteem. Given the preeminence of this primary good, the parties in the original position surely do not want to find themselves so opposed. It would tend to make the good of social union difficult if not impossible to achieve. The best solution is to support the primary good of self-respect as far as possible by the assignment of the basic liberties that can indeed be made equal, defining the same status for all. At the same time, relative shares of material means are relegated to a subordinate place. Thus we arrive at another reason for factoring the social order into two parts as indicated by the principles of justice. While these principles permit inequalities in return for contributions that are for the benefit of all, the precedence of liberty entails equality in the social bases of respect.

Now it is quite possible that this idea cannot be carried through completely. To some extent men's sense of their own worth may hinge upon their institutional position and their income share. If, however, the account of social envy and jealousy is sound, then with the appropriate background arrangements, these inclinations should not be excessive. But theoretically we can if necessary include self-respect in the primary goods, the index of which defines expectations. Then in applications of the difference principle, this index can allow for the effects of excusable envy (§80); the expectations of the less advantaged are lower the more severe these effects. Whether some adjustment for self-respect has to be made is best decided from the standpoint of the legislative stage where the parties have more information and the principle of political determination applies. Admittedly this problem is an unwelcome complication. Since simplicity is itself desirable in a public conception of justice (§49), the conditions that elicit excusable envy should if possible be avoided. I have mentioned this point not to settle it, but only to note that when necessary the expectations of the less advantaged can be understood so as to include the primary good of self-respect.

The second part of the argument seems to confirm, then, the priority of liberty. Still, some may object to this account of the priority of liberty that societies have other ways of affirming self-respect and of coping with envy and other disruptive inclinations. Thus in a feudal or in a caste system each person is believed to have his allotted station in the natural order of things. His comparisons are presumably confined to within his own estate or caste, these ranks becoming in effect so many noncomparing groups established independently of human control and sanctioned by religion and theology. Men resign themselves to their position should it ever occur to them to question it; and since all may view themselves as assigned their vocation, everyone is held to be equally fated and equally noble in the eyes of providence.14 This conception of society solves the problem of social justice by eliminating in thought the circumstances that give rise to it. The basic structure is said to be already determined, and not something for human beings to affect. On this view, it misconceives men's place in the world to suppose that the social order should match principles which they would as equals consent to.

Contrary to this idea, I have assumed all along that the parties are to be guided in their adoption of a conception of justice by a knowledge of the general facts about society. They take for granted then that institutions are not fixed but change over time, altered by natural circumstances and the activities and conflicts of social groups. The constraints of nature are recognized, but men are not powerless to shape their social arrangements.

<sup>14.</sup> On this point, see Max Weber, *Economy and Society,* ed. Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich (New York, Bedminster Press, 1968), vol. II, pp. 435f, 598f. See pp. 490–499 for general comments on the things looked for in religions by different social strata. Also consult Ernst Troeltsch, *The Social Teaching of the Christian Churches,* trans. Olive Wyon (London, George Allen and Unwin, 1931), vol. I, pp. 120–127, 132f, 134–138; and Scheler, *Ressentiment,* pp. 56f.

This assumption is likewise part of the background of the theory of justice. It follows that certain ways of dealing with envy and other aberrant propensities are closed to a well-ordered society. For example, it cannot keep them in check by promulgating false or unfounded beliefs. For our problem is how society should be arranged if it is to conform to principles that rational persons with true general beliefs would acknowledge in the original position. The publicity condition requires the parties to assume that as members of society they will also know the general facts. The reasoning leading up to the initial agreement is to be accessible to public understanding. Of course, in working out what the requisite principles are, we must rely upon current knowledge as recognized by common sense and the existing scientific consensus. But there is no reasonable alternative to doing this. We have to concede that as established beliefs change, it is possible that the principles of justice which it seems rational to acknowledge may likewise change. Thus when the belief in a fixed natural order sanctioning a hierarchical society is abandoned, assuming here that this belief is not true, a tendency is set up in the direction of the two principles of justice in serial order. The effective protection of the equal liberties becomes increasingly of first importance in support of self-respect and this affirms the precedence of the first principle.

#### 83. HAPPINESS AND DOMINANT ENDS

In order to be in a position to take up the question of the good of justice, I shall discuss the manner in which just institutions frame our choice of a rational plan and incorporate the regulative element of our good. I shall approach this topic in a roundabout fashion by returning in this section to the concept of happiness and noting the temptation to think of it as determined by a dominant end. Doing this will lead naturally into the problems of hedonism and of the unity of the self. How these matters are connected should be apparent in due course.

Earlier I said that, with certain qualifications, a person is happy when he is in the way of a successful execution (more or less) of a rational plan of life drawn up under (more or less) favorable conditions, and he is reasonably confident that his intentions can be carried through (§63). Thus we are happy when our rational plans are going well, our more important aims being fulfilled, and we are with reason quite sure that our good fortune will continue. The achievement of happiness depends upon circumstances and luck, and hence the gloss about favorable conditions. While I shall not discuss the concept of happiness in any detail, we should consider a few further points to bring out the connection with the problem of hedonism.

First of all, happiness has two aspects: one is the successful execution of a rational plan (the schedule of activities and aims) which a person strives to realize, the other is his state of mind, his sure confidence supported by good reasons that his success will endure. Being happy involves both a certain achievement in action and a rational assurance about the outcome.15 This definition of happiness is objective: plans are to be adjusted to the conditions of our life and our confidence must rest upon sound beliefs. Alternatively, happiness might be defined subjectively as follows: a person is happy when he believes that he is in the way of a successful execution (more or less) of a rational plan, and so on as before, adding the rider that if he is mistaken or deluded, then by contingency and coincidence nothing happens to disabuse him of his misconceptions. By good luck he is not cast out of his fool's paradise. Now the definition to be preferred is that which best fits the theory of justice and coheres with our considered judgments of value. At this point it suffices to observe, as I indicated a few pages back (§82), that we have assumed that the parties in the original position have correct beliefs. They acknowledge a conception of justice in the light of general truths about persons and their place in society. Thus it seems natural to suppose that in framing their plans of life they are similarly lucid. Of course none of this is strictly argument. Eventually one has to appraise the objective definition as a part of the moral theory to which it belongs.

Adopting this definition, and keeping in mind the account of rational plans presented earlier (§§63–65), we can interpret the special characteristics sometimes attributed to happiness.16 For example, happiness is self-contained: that is, it is chosen solely for its own sake. To be sure, a rational plan will include many (or at least several) final aims, and any of these may be pursued partly because it complements and furthers one or more other aims as well. Mutual support among ends pursued for their own sake is an important feature of rational plans, and therefore these ends are not usually sought solely for themselves. Nevertheless executing

<sup>15.</sup> For this point see Anthony Kenny, "Happiness," *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,* vol. 66 (1965–1966), pp. 101f.

<sup>16.</sup> Notably by Aristotle, *Nicomachean Ethics,* 1097a15–b21. For a discussion of Aristotle's account of happiness, see W. F. R. Hardie, *Aristotle's Ethical Theory* (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1968), ch. II.

the entire plan, and the enduring confidence with which this is done, is something that we want to do and to have only for itself. All considerations including those of right and justice (using here the full theory of good) have already been surveyed in drawing up the plan. And therefore the whole activity is self-contained.

Happiness is also self-sufficient: a rational plan when realized with assurance makes a life fully worthy of choice and demands nothing further in addition. When circumstances are especially favorable and the execution particularly successful, one's happiness is complete. Within the general conception one sought to follow, there is nothing essential that is lacking, no way in which it could have been distinctly better. So even if the material means that support our mode of life can always be imagined to be greater, and a different pattern of aims might often have been chosen, still the actual fulfillment of the plan itself may have, as compositions, paintings, and poems often do, a certain completeness which though marred by circumstance and human failing is evident from the whole. Thus some become exemplars of human flourishing and models for emulation, their lives being as instructive in how to live as any philosophical doctrine.

A person is happy then during those periods when he is successfully carrying through a rational plan and he is with reason confident that his efforts will come to fruition. He may be said to approach blessedness to the extent that conditions are supremely favorable and his life complete. Yet it does not follow that in advancing a rational plan one is pursuing happiness, not at least as this is normally meant. For one thing, happiness is not one aim among others that we aspire to, but the fulfillment of the whole design itself. But also I have supposed first that rational plans satisfy the constraints of right and justice (as the full theory of the good stipulates). To say of someone that he seeks happiness does not, it seems, imply that he is prepared either to violate or to affirm these restrictions. Therefore the acceptance of these limits should be made explicit. And secondly, the pursuit of happiness often suggests the pursuit of certain sorts of ends, for example, life, liberty, and one's own welfare.17 Thus persons who devote themselves selflessly to a righteous cause, or who dedicate their lives to furthering the well-being of others, are not normally thought to seek happiness. It would be misleading to say this of saints and heroes, or of those whose plan of life is in some marked degree supererogatory. They do not have the kinds of aims that fall under this

<sup>17.</sup> For these two qualifications, see Kenny, "Happiness," pp. 98f.

heading, admittedly not sharply defined. Yet saints and heroes, and persons whose intentions acknowledge the limits of right and justice, are in fact happy when their plans succeed. Although they do not strive for happiness, they may nevertheless be happy in advancing the claims of justice and the well-being of others, or in attaining the excellences to which they are attracted.

But how in general is it possible to choose among plans rationally? What procedure can an individual follow when faced with this sort of decision? I now want to return to this question. Previously I said that a rational plan is one that would be chosen with deliberative rationality from among the class of plans all of which satisfy the principles of rational choice and stand up to certain forms of critical reflection. We eventually reach a point though where we just have to decide which plan we most prefer without further guidance from principle (§64). There is however one device of deliberation that I have not yet mentioned, and this is to analyze our aims. That is, we can try to find a more detailed or more illuminating description of the object of our desires hoping that the counting principles will then settle the case. Thus it may happen that a fuller or deeper characterization of what we want discloses that an inclusive plan exists after all.

Let us consider again the example of planning a holiday (§63). Often when we ask ourselves why we wish to visit two distinct places, we find that certain more general ends stand in the background and that all of them can be fulfilled by going to one place rather than the other. Thus we may want to study certain styles of art, and further reflection may bring out that one plan is superior or equally good on all these counts. In this sense we may discover that our desire to go to Paris is more intense than our desire to go to Rome. Often however a finer description fails to be decisive. If we want to see both the most famous church in Christendom and the most famous museum, we may be stuck. Of course these desires too may be examined further. Nothing in the way that most desires are expressed shows whether there exists a more revealing characterization of what we really want. But we have to allow for the possibility, indeed for the probability, that sooner or later we will reach incomparable aims between which we must choose with deliberative rationality. We may trim, reshape, and transform our aims in a variety of ways as we try to fit them together. Using the principles of rational choice as guidelines, and formulating our desires in the most lucid form we can, we may narrow the scope of purely preferential choice, but we cannot eliminate it altogether.

The indeterminacy of decision seems to arise, then, from the fact that a person has many aims for which there is no ready standard of comparison to decide between them when they conflict. There are many stopping points in practical deliberation and many ways in which we characterize the things we want for their own sake. Thus it is easy to see why the idea of there being a single dominant end (as opposed to an inclusive end) at which it is rational to aim is highly appealing.18 For if there exists such an end to which all other ends are subordinate, then presumably all desires, insofar as they are rational, admit of an analysis which shows the counting principles to apply. The procedure for making a rational choice, and the conception of such a choice, would then be perfectly clear: deliberation would always concern means to ends, all lesser ends in turn being ordered as means to one single dominant end. The many finite chains of reasons eventually converge and meet at the same point. Hence a rational decision is always in principle possible, since only difficulties of computation and lack of information remain.

Now it is essential to understand what the dominant-end theorist wants: namely, a method of choice which the agent himself can always follow in order to make a rational decision. Thus there are three requirements: the conception of deliberation must specify (1) a first-person procedure which is (2) generally applicable and (3) guaranteed to lead to the best result (at least under favorable conditions of information and given the ability to calculate). We have no procedures meeting these conditions. A random device provides a general method but it would be rational only in special circumstances. In everyday life we employ schemes of deliberation acquired from our culture and modified during the course of our personal history. But there is no assurance that these forms of reflection are rational. Perhaps they only meet various minimum standards which enable us to get by, all the while falling far short of the best that we might do. Thus if we seek a general procedure by which to balance our conflicting aims so as to single out, or at least to identify in thought, the best course of action, the idea of a dominant end seems to give a simple and natural answer.

Let us consider then what this dominant end might be. It cannot be happiness itself, since this state is attained by executing a rational plan of life already set out independently. The most we can say is that happiness is an inclusive end, meaning that the plan itself, the realization of which

<sup>18.</sup> The terminology of "dominant" and "inclusive" ends is from W. F. R. Hardie, "The Final Good in Aristotle's Ethics," *Philosophy,* vol. 40 (1965). This usage is not adhered to in his *Aristotle's Ethical Theory.*

makes one happy, includes and orders a plurality of aims, whatever these are. On the other hand, it is most implausible to think of the dominant end as a personal or social objective such as the exercise of political power, or the achievement of social acclaim, or maximizing one's material possessions. Surely it is contrary to our considered judgments of value, and indeed inhuman, to be so taken with but one of these ends that we do not moderate the pursuit of it for the sake of anything else. For a dominant end is at least lexically prior to all other aims and seeking to advance it always takes absolute precedence. Thus Loyola holds that the dominant end is serving God, and by this means saving our soul. He is consistent in recognizing that furthering the divine intentions is the sole criterion for balancing subordinate aims. It is for this reason alone that we should prefer health to sickness, riches to poverty, honor to dishonor, a long life to a short one, and, one might add, friendship and affection to hatred and animosity. We must be indifferent, he says, to all attachments whatsoever, for these become inordinate once they prevent us from being like equalized scales in a balance, ready to take the course that we believe is most for the glory of God.19

It should be observed that this principle of indifference is compatible with our enjoying lesser pleasures and allowing ourselves to engage in play and amusements. For these activities relax the mind and rest the spirit so that we are better fitted to advance more important aims. Thus although Aquinas believes that the vision of God is the last end of all human knowledge and endeavor, he concedes play and amusements a place in our life. Nevertheless these pleasures are permitted only to the extent that the superordinate aim is thereby advanced, or at least not hindered. We should arrange things so that our indulgences in frivolity and jest, in affection and friendship, do not interfere with the fullest attainment of our final end.20

The extreme nature of dominant-end views is often concealed by the vagueness and ambiguity of the end proposed. Thus if God is conceived (as surely he must be) as a moral being, then the end of serving him above all else is left unspecified to the extent that the divine intentions are not clear from revelation, or evident from natural reason. Within these limits a theological doctrine of morals is subject to the same problems of balancing principles and determining precedence which trouble other con-

<sup>19.</sup> See *The Spiritual Exercises,* The First Week, the remarks under the heading "Principle and Foundation"; and The Second Week, the remarks under the heading "Three Occasions When a Wise Choice Can Be Made."

<sup>20.</sup> *Summa Contra Gentiles,* bk. III, ch. XXV.

ceptions. Since disputed questions commonly lie here, the solution propounded by the religious ethic is only apparent. And certainly when the dominant end is clearly specified as attaining some objective goal such as political power or material wealth, the underlying fanaticism and inhumanity are manifest. Human good is heterogeneous because the aims of the self are heterogeneous. Although to subordinate all our aims to one end does not strictly speaking violate the principles of rational choice (not the counting principles anyway), it still strikes us as irrational, or more likely as mad. The self is disfigured and put in the service of one of its ends for the sake of system.

#### 84. HEDONISM AS A METHOD OF CHOICE

Traditionally hedonism is interpreted in one of two ways: either as the contention that the sole intrinsic good is pleasurable feeling, or as the psychological thesis that the only thing individuals strive for is pleasure. However I shall understand hedonism in a third way, namely, as trying to carry through the dominant-end conception of deliberation. It attempts to show how a rational choice is always possible, at least in principle. Although this effort fails, I shall examine it briefly for the light it throws upon the contrast between utilitarianism and the contract doctrine.

I imagine the hedonist to reason as follows. First he thinks that, if human life is to be guided by reason, there must exist a dominant end. There is no rational way to balance our competing aims against one another except as means to some higher end. Second, he interprets pleasure narrowly as agreeable feeling. Pleasantness as an attribute of feeling and sensation is thought to be the only plausible candidate for the role of the dominant end, and therefore it is the only thing good in itself. That, so conceived, pleasure alone is good is not postulated straightway as a first principle and then held to accord with our considered judgments of value. Rather pleasure is arrived at as the dominant end by a process of elimination. Granting that rational choices are possible, such an end must exist. At the same time this end cannot be happiness or any objective goal. To avoid the circularity of the one and the inhumanity and fanaticism of the other, the hedonist turns inwards. He finds the ultimate end in some definite quality of sensation or feeling identifiable by introspection. We can suppose, if we like, that pleasantness can be ostensibly defined as that attribute which is common to the feelings and experiences toward which we have a favorable attitude and wish to prolong, other things equal. Thus, for purposes of illustration, one might say that pleasantness is that feature which is common to the experience of smelling roses, of tasting chocolate, of requited affection, and so on, and analogously for the opposite attribute of painfulness.21

The hedonist maintains, then, that a rational agent knows exactly how to proceed in determining his good: he is to ascertain which of the plans open to him promises the greatest net balance of pleasure over pain. This plan defines his rational choice, the best way to order his competing aims. The counting principles now apply trivially, since all good things are homogeneous and therefore comparable as means to the one end of pleasure. Of course these assessments are plagued by uncertainties and lack of information, and normally only the crudest estimates can be made. Yet for hedonism this is not a real difficulty: what counts is that the maximum of pleasure provides a clear idea of the good. We are now said to know the one thing the pursuit of which gives rational form to our life. Largely for these reasons Sidgwick thinks that pleasure must be the single rational end that is to guide deliberation.22

It is important to note two points. First, when pleasure is regarded as a special attribute of feeling and sensation, it is conceived as a definite measure on which calculations can be based. By reckoning in terms of the intensity and duration of pleasant experiences, the necessary computations can theoretically be made. The method of hedonism provides a first-person procedure of choice as the standard of happiness does not. Second, taking pleasure as the dominant end does not imply that we have any particular objective goals. We find pleasure in the most varied activities and in the quest for any number of things. Therefore aiming to maximize pleasurable feeling seems at least to avoid the appearance of fanaticism and inhumanity while still defining a rational method for firstperson choice. Furthermore, the two traditional interpretations of hedonism are now easily accounted for. If pleasure is indeed the only end the pursuit of which enables us to identify rational plans, then surely pleasure would appear to be the sole intrinsic good, and so we would have arrived at the principle of hedonism by an argument from the conditions of rational deliberation. A variant of psychological hedonism also follows: for although it is going too far to say that rational conduct would always consciously aim at pleasure, it would in any case be regulated by a schedule of activities designed to maximize the net balance of pleasurable

<sup>21.</sup> The illustration is from C. D. Broad, *Five Types of Ethical Theory* (London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1930), pp. 186f.

<sup>22.</sup> *The Methods of Ethics,* 7th ed. (London, Macmillan, 1907), pp. 405–407, 479.

feeling. Since it leads to the more familiar interpretations, the thesis that the pursuit of pleasure provides the only rational method of deliberation seems to be the fundamental idea of hedonism.

It seems obvious that hedonism fails to define a reasonable dominant end. We need only note that once pleasure is conceived, as it must be, in a sufficiently definite way so that its intensity and duration can enter into the agent's calculations, then it is no longer plausible that it should be taken as the sole rational aim.23 Surely the preference for a certain attribute of feeling or sensation above all else is as unbalanced and inhuman as an overriding desire to maximize one's power over others or one's material wealth. No doubt it is for this reason that Sidgwick is reluctant to grant that pleasantness is a particular quality of feeling; yet he must concede this if pleasure is to serve, as he wants it to, as the ultimate criterion to weigh ideal values such as knowledge, beauty, and friendship against one another.24

And then too there is the fact that there are different sorts of agreeable feelings themselves incomparable, as well as the quantitative dimensions of pleasure, intensity and duration. How are we to balance these when they conflict? Are we to choose a brief but intense pleasant experience of one kind of feeling over a less intense but longer pleasant experience of another? Aristotle says that the good man if necessary lays down his life for his friends, since he prefers a short period of intense pleasure to a long one of mild enjoyment, a twelvemonth of noble life to many years of humdrum existence.25 But how does he decide this? Further, as Santayana observes, we must settle the relative worth of pleasure and pain. When Petrarch says that a thousand pleasures are not worth one pain, he adopts a standard for comparing them that is more basic than either. The person himself must make this decision, taking into account the full range of his inclinations and desires, present and future. Clearly we have made no advance beyond deliberative rationality. The problem of a plurality of ends arises all over again within the class of subjective feelings.26

<sup>23.</sup> As Broad observes in *Five Types of Ethical Theory,* p. 187.

<sup>24.</sup> In *Methods of Ethics,* p. 127, Sidgwick denies that pleasure is a measurable quality of feeling independent of its relation from volition. This is the view of some writers, he says, but one he cannot accept. He defines pleasure "as a feeling which, when experienced by intelligent beings, is at least apprehended as desirable or—in cases of comparison—preferable." It would seem that the view he here rejects is the one he relies upon later as the final criterion to introduce coherence among ends. See pp. 405–407, 479. Otherwise the hedonist method of choice no longer provides instructions that can be followed.

<sup>25.</sup> *Nicomachean Ethics,* 1169a17–26.

<sup>26.</sup> *The Life of Reason in Common Sense* (New York, Charles Scribner, 1905), pp. 237f.

It may be objected that in economics and decision theory these problems are overcome. But this contention is based on a misunderstanding. In the theory of demand, for example, it is assumed that the consumer's preferences satisfy various postulates: they define a complete ordering over the set of alternatives and exhibit the properties of convexity and continuity, and the like. Given these assumptions, it can be shown that a utility function exists which matches these preferences in the sense that one alternative is chosen over another if and only if the value of the function for the selected alternative is greater. This function characterizes the individual's choices, what he in fact prefers, granted that his preferences meet certain stipulations. It asserts nothing at all about how a person arranges his decisions in such a coherent order to begin with, nor clearly can it claim to be a first-person procedure of choice that someone might reasonably follow, since it only records the outcome of his deliberations. At best the principles that economists have supposed the choices of rational individuals to satisfy can be presented as guidelines for us to consider when we make our decisions. But so understood, these criteria are just the principles of rational choice (or their analogues) and we are back once again with deliberative rationality.27

It seems indisputable, then, that there is no dominant end the pursuit of which accords with our considered judgments of value. The inclusive end of realizing a rational plan of life is an entirely different thing. But the failure of hedonism to provide a rational procedure of choice should occasion no surprise. Wittgenstein showed that it is a mistake to postulate certain special experiences to explain how we distinguish memories from imaginings, beliefs from suppositions, and so on for other mental acts. Similarly, it is antecedently unlikely that certain kinds of agreeable feeling can define a unit of account the use of which explains the possibility of rational deliberation. Neither pleasure nor any other determinate end can play the role that the hedonist would assign it.28

<sup>27.</sup> Thus to the objection that price theory must fail because it seeks to predict the unpredictable, the decisions of persons with free will, Walras says: "Actually, we have never attempted to predict decisions made under conditions of perfect freedom; we have only tried to express the effects of such decisions in terms of mathematics. In our theory each trader may be assumed to determine his utility or want curves as he pleases." *Elements of Pure Economics,* trans. William Jaffé (Homewood, Ill., Richard D. Irwin, 1954), p. 256. See also P. A. Samuelson, *Foundations of Economic Analysis* (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1947), the remarks pp. 90–92, 97f; and R. D. Luce and Howard Raiffa, *Games and Decisions* (New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1957), pp. 16, 21–24, 38.

<sup>28.</sup> See *The Philosophical Investigations* (Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1953). The argument against postulating special experiences is made throughout for many different cases. For the application to pleasure, see the remarks of G. E. M. Anscombe, *Intention* (Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1957). An-

Now philosophers have supposed that characteristic experiences exist and guide our mental life for many different reasons. So while it seems a simple matter to show that hedonism gets us nowhere, the important thing is to see why one might be driven to resort to such a desperate expedient. I have already noted one possible reason: the desire to narrow down the scope of purely preferential choice in determining our good. In a teleological theory any vagueness or ambiguity in the conception of the good is transferred to that of the right. Hence if the good of individuals is something that, so to speak, is just up to them to decide as individuals, so likewise within certain limits is that which is right. But it is natural to think that what is right is not a matter of mere preference, and therefore one tries to find a definite conception of the good.

There is, however, another reason: a teleological theory needs a way to compare the diverse goods of different individuals so that the total good can be maximized. How can these assessments be made? Even if certain ends serve to organize the plans of individuals taken singly, they do not suffice to define a conception of right. It would appear, then, that the turn inwards to the standard of agreeable feeling is an attempt to find a common denominator among the plurality of persons, an interpersonal currency as it were, by means of which the social ordering can be specified. And this suggestion is all the more compelling if it is already maintained that this standard is the aim of each person to the extent that he is rational.

By way of conclusion, I should not say that a teleological doctrine is necessarily driven to some form of hedonism in order to define a coherent theory. Yet it does seem that the tendency in this direction has a certain naturalness. Hedonism is, one might say, the symptomatic drift of teleological theories insofar as they try to formulate a clear and applicable method of moral reasoning. The weakness of hedonism reflects the impossibility of defining an appropriate definite end to be maximized. And this suggests that the structure of teleological doctrines is radically misconceived: from the start they relate the right and the good in the wrong

scombe says: "We might adapt a remark of Wittgenstein's about meaning and say 'Pleasure cannot be an impression; for no impression could have the consequences of pleasure.' They [the British Empiricists] were saying that something which they thought of as like a particular tickle or itch was quite obviously the point of doing anything whatsoever" (p. 77). See also Gilbert Ryle, "Pleasure," *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,* supp. vol. 28 (1954), and *Dilemmas* (Cambridge, The University Press, 1954), ch. IV; Anthony Kenny, *Action, Emotion and Will* (London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1963), ch. VI; and C. C. W. Taylor, "Pleasure," *Analysis,* supp. vol. (1963). These studies present what seems to be the more correct view. In the text I try to explain the motivation from the standpoint of moral philosophy of the so-called British Empiricist conception of pleasure. That it is fallacious I pretty much take for granted, as the writers mentioned have, I believe, shown.

way. We should not attempt to give form to our life by first looking to the good independently defined. It is not our aims that primarily reveal our nature but rather the principles that we would acknowledge to govern the background conditions under which these aims are to be formed and the manner in which they are to be pursued. For the self is prior to the ends which are affirmed by it; even a dominant end must be chosen from among numerous possibilities. There is no way to get beyond deliberative rationality. We should therefore reverse the relation between the right and the good proposed by teleological doctrines and view the right as prior. The moral theory is then developed by working in the opposite direction. I shall now try to explain these last remarks in the light of the contract doctrine.

#### 85. THE UNITY OF THE SELF

The outcome of the preceding discussion is that there is no one aim by reference to which all of our choices can reasonably be made. Significant intuitionist elements enter into determining the good, and in a teleological theory these are bound to affect the right. The classical utilitarian tries to avoid this consequence by the doctrine of hedonism, but to no avail. We cannot, however, stop here; we must find a constructive solution to the problem of choice which hedonism seeks to answer. Thus we are faced once again with the question: if there is no single end that determines the appropriate pattern of aims, how is a rational plan of life actually to be identified? Now the answer to this question has already been given: a rational plan is one that would be chosen with deliberative rationality as defined by the full theory of the good. It remains to make sure that, within the context of a contract doctrine, this answer is perfectly satisfactory and that the problems which beset hedonism do not arise.

As I have said, moral personality is characterized by two capacities: one for a conception of the good, the other for a sense of justice. When realized, the first is expressed by a rational plan of life, the second by a regulative desire to act upon certain principles of right. Thus a moral person is a subject with ends he has chosen, and his fundamental preference is for conditions that enable him to frame a mode of life that expresses his nature as a free and equal rational being as fully as circumstances permit. Now the unity of the person is manifest in the coherence of his plan, this unity being founded on the higher-order desire to follow, in ways consistent with his sense of right and justice, the principles of rational choice. Of course, a person shapes his aims not all at once but only gradually; but in ways that justice allows, he is able to formulate and to follow a plan of life and thereby to fashion his own unity.

The distinctive feature of a dominant-end conception is how it supposes the self's unity is achieved. Thus in hedonism the self becomes one by trying to maximize the sum of pleasurable experiences within its psychic boundaries. A rational self must establish its unity in this manner. Since pleasure is the dominant end, the individual is indifferent to all aspects of himself, viewing his natural assets of mind and body, and even his natural inclinations and attachments, as so many materials for obtaining pleasant experiences. Moreover, it is not by aiming at pleasure as his pleasure but simply as pleasure that gives unity to the self. Whether it is his pleasure or that of others as well which is to be advanced raises a further matter that can be put aside so long as we are dealing with one person's good. But once we consider the problem of social choice, the utilitarian principle in its hedonistic form is perfectly natural. For if any one individual must order his deliberations by seeking the dominant end of pleasure and can secure his rational personhood in no other way, then it seems that a number of persons in their joint efforts should strive to order their collective actions by maximizing the pleasurable experiences of the group. Thus just as one saint when alone is to work for the glory of God, so the members of an association of saints are to cooperate together to do whatever is necessary for the same end. The difference between the individual and the social case is that the resources of the self, its mental and physical capacities and its emotional sensibilities and desires, are placed in a different context. In both instances these materials are in the service of the dominant end. But depending on the other agencies available to cooperate with them, it is the pleasure of the self or of the social group that is to be maximized.

Further, if the same sorts of considerations that lead to hedonism as a theory of first-person choice are applied to the theory of right, the principle of utility seems quite plausible. For let us suppose first that happiness (defined in terms of agreeable feeling) is the sole good. Then, as even intuitionists concede, it is at least a prima facie principle of right to maximize happiness. If this principle is not alone regulative, there must be some other criterion such as distribution which is to be assigned some weight. But by reference to what dominant end of social conduct are these standards to be balanced? Since this end must exist if judgments of right are to be reasoned and not arbitrary, the principle of utility appears to specify the required goal. No other principle has the features necessary to define the ultimate end of right conduct. I believe that it is essentially this reasoning that underlies Mill's so-called proof of utility.29

Now in justice as fairness a complete reversal of perspective is brought about by the priority of right and the Kantian interpretation. To see this we have only to recall the features of the original position and the nature of the principles that are chosen. The parties regard moral personality and not the capacity for pleasure and pain as the fundamental aspect of the self. They do not know what final aims persons have, and all dominantend conceptions are rejected. Thus it would not occur to them to acknowledge the principle of utility in its hedonistic form. There is no more reason for the parties to agree to this criterion than to maximize any other particular objective. They think of themselves as beings who can and do choose their final ends (always plural in number). Just as one person is to decide upon his plan of life in the light of full information (no restrictions being imposed in this case), so a plurality of persons are to settle the terms of their cooperation in a situation that gives all fair representation as moral beings. The parties' aim in the original position is to establish just and favorable conditions for each to fashion his own unity. Their fundamental interest in liberty and in the means to make fair use of it is the expression of their seeing themselves as primarily moral persons with an equal right to choose their mode of life. Thus they acknowledge the two principles of justice to be ranked in serial order as circumstances permit.

We must now connect these remarks with the problem of the indeterminacy of choice with which we began. The main idea is that given the priority of right, the choice of our conception of the good is framed within definite limits. The principles of justice and their realization in social forms define the bounds within which our deliberations take place. The essential unity of the self is already provided by the conception of right. Moreover, in a well-ordered society this unity is the same for all; everyone's conception of the good as given by his rational plan is a subplan of the larger comprehensive plan that regulates the community as a social union of social unions. The many associations of varying sizes

29. See *Utilitarianism,* ch. IV. This much-discussed chapter, and especially par. 3, is noteworthy for the fact that Mill seems to believe that if he can establish that happiness is the sole good, he has shown that the principle of utility is the criterion of right. The chapter title refers to the proof of the principle of utility; but what we are given is an argument to the effect that happiness alone is good. Now nothing so far follows about the conception of right. It is only by looking back at the first chapter of the essay, and attending to Mill's notion of the structure of a moral theory, as I discussed it in §8 and outlined it in the text above, that we can set out all the premises in the light of which Mill thought his argument a proof.

and aims, being adjusted to one another by the public conception of justice, simplify decision by offering definite ideals and forms of life that have been developed and tested by innumerable individuals, sometimes for generations. Thus in drawing up our plan of life we do not start de novo; we are not required to choose from countless possibilities without given structure or fixed contours. So while there is no algorithm for settling upon our good, no first-person procedure of choice, the priority of right and justice securely constrains these deliberations so that they become more manageable. Since the basic rights and liberties are already firmly established, our choices cannot distort our claims upon one another.

Now given the precedence of right and justice, the indeterminacy of the conception of the good is much less troublesome. In fact, the considerations that lead a teleological theory to embrace the notion of a dominant end lose their force. First of all, the purely preferential elements in choice, while not eliminated, are nevertheless confined within the constraints of right already on hand. Since men's claims on one another are not affected, the indeterminacy is relatively innocuous. Moreover, within the limits allowed by the principles of right, there need be no standard of correctness beyond that of deliberative rationality. If a person's plan of life meets this criterion and if he succeeds in carrying it out, and in doing so finds it worthwhile, there are no grounds for saying that it would have been better if he had done something else. We should not simply assume that our rational good is uniquely determined. From the standpoint of the theory of justice, this assumption is unnecessary. Secondly, we are not required to go beyond deliberative rationality in order to define a clear and workable conception of right. The principles of justice have a definite content and the argument supporting them uses only the thin account of the good and its list of primary goods. Once the conception of justice is established, the priority of right guarantees the precedence of its principles. Thus the two considerations that make dominant-end conceptions attractive for teleological theories are both absent in the contract doctrine. Such is the effect of the reversal of structure.

Earlier when introducing the Kantian interpretation of justice as fairness, I mentioned that there is a sense in which the unanimity condition on the principles of justice is suited to express even the nature of a single self (§40). Offhand this suggestion seems paradoxical. How can the requirement of unanimity fail to be a constraint? One reason is that the veil of ignorance insures that everyone should reason in the same way and so the condition is satisfied as a matter of course. But a deeper explanation lies in the fact that the contract doctrine has a structure opposite to that of a utilitarian theory. In the latter each person draws up his rational plan without hindrance under full information, and society then proceeds to maximize the aggregate fulfillment of the plans that result. In justice as fairness, on the other hand, all agree ahead of time upon the principles by which their claims on one another are to be settled. These principles are then given absolute precedence so that they regulate social institutions without question and each frames his plans in conformity with them. Plans that happen to be out of line must be revised. Thus the prior collective agreement sets up from the first certain fundamental structural features common to everyone's plan. The nature of the self as a free and equal moral person is the same for all, and the similarity in the basic form of rational plans expresses this fact. Moreover, as shown by the notion of society as a social union of social unions, the members of a community participate in one another's nature: we appreciate what others do as things we might have done but which they do for us, and what we do is similarly done for them. Since the self is realized in the activities of many selves, relations of justice that conform to principles which would be assented to by all are best fitted to express the nature of each. Eventually then the requirement of a unanimous agreement connects up with the idea of human beings who as members of a social union seek the values of community.

It may be thought that once the principles of justice are given precedence, then there is a dominant end that organizes our life after all. Yet this idea is based on a misunderstanding. To be sure the principles of justice are lexically prior to that of efficiency, and the first principle has precedence over the second. It follows that an ideal conception of the social order is set up which is to regulate the direction of change and the efforts of reform (§41). But it is the principles of individual duty and obligation that define the claim of this ideal upon persons and these do not make it all controlling. Furthermore, I have all along assumed that the proposed dominant end belongs to a teleological theory in which by definition the good is specified independently from the right. The role of this end is in part to make the conception of right reasonably precise. In justice as fairness there can be no dominant end in this sense, nor as we have seen is one needed for this purpose. Finally, the dominant end of a teleological theory is so defined that we can never finally achieve it and therefore the injunction to advance it always applies. Recall here the earlier remarks as to why the principle of utility is not really suitable for a lexical ordering: the later criteria will never come into play, except in special cases to break ties. The principles of justice, on the other hand, represent more or less definite social aims and restrictions (§8). Once we realize a certain structure of institutions, we are at liberty to determine and to pursue our good within the limits which its arrangements allow.

In view of these reflections, the contrast between a teleological theory and the contract doctrine may be expressed in the following intuitive way: the former defines the good locally, for example, as a more or less homogeneous quality or attribute of experience, and regards it as an extensive magnitude which is to be maximized over some totality; whereas the latter moves in the opposite fashion by identifying a sequence of increasingly specific structural forms of right conduct each set within the preceding one, and in this manner working from a general framework for the whole to a sharper and sharper determination of its parts. Hedonistic utilitarianism is the classical instance of the first procedure and illustrates it with compelling simplicity. Justice as fairness exemplifies the second possibility. Thus the four-stage sequence (§31) formulates an order of agreements and enactments designed to build up in several steps a hierarchical structure of principles, standards, and rules, which when consistently applied and adhered to, lead to a definite constitution for social action.

Now this sequence does not aim at the complete specification of conduct. Rather the idea is to approximate the boundaries, however vague, within which individuals and associations are at liberty to advance their aims and deliberative rationality has free play. Ideally the approximation should converge in the sense that with further steps the cases left unaccounted for become of less and less importance. The notion guiding the entire construction is that of the original position and its Kantian interpretation: this notion contains within itself the elements that select which information is relevant at each stage, and generate a sequence of adjustments appropriate to the contingent conditions of the existing society.

#### 86. THE GOOD OF THE SENSE OF JUSTICE

Now that all the parts of the theory of justice are before us, the argument for congruence can be completed. It suffices to tie together the various aspects of a well-ordered society and to see them in the appropriate context. The concepts of justice and goodness are linked with distinct principles and the question of congruence is whether these two families of criteria fit together. More precisely, each concept with its associated principles defines a point of view from which institutions, actions, and plans of life can be assessed. A sense of justice is an effective desire to apply and to act from the principles of justice and so from the point of view of justice. Thus what is to be established is that it is rational (as defined by the thin theory of the good) for those in a well-ordered society to affirm their sense of justice as regulative of their plan of life. It remains to be shown that this disposition to take up and to be guided by the standpoint of justice accords with the individual's good.

Whether these two points of view are congruent is likely to be a crucial factor in determining stability. But congruence is not a foregone conclusion even in a well-ordered society. We must verify it. Of course, the rationality of choosing the principles of justice in the original position is not in question. The argument for this decision has already been made; and if it is sound, just institutions are collectively rational and to everyone's advantage from a suitably general perspective. It is also rational for each to urge others to support these arrangements and to fulfill their duties and obligations. The problem is whether the regulative desire to adopt the standpoint of justice belongs to a person's own good when viewed in the light of the thin theory with no restrictions on information. We should like to know that this desire is indeed rational; being rational for one, it is rational for all, and therefore no tendencies to instability exist. More precisely, consider any given person in a well-ordered society. He knows, I assume, that institutions are just and that others have (and will continue to have) a sense of justice similar to his, and therefore that they comply (and will continue to comply) with these arrangements. We want to show that on these suppositions it is rational for someone, as defined by the thin theory, to affirm his sense of justice. The plan of life which does this is his best reply to the similar plans of his associates; and being rational for anyone, it is rational for all.

It is important not to confuse this problem with that of justifying being a just man to an egoist. An egoist is someone committed to the point of view of his own interests. His final ends are related to himself: his wealth and position, his pleasures and social prestige, and so on. Such a man may act justly, that is, do things that a just man would do; but so long as he remains an egoist, he cannot do them for the just man's reasons. Having these reasons is inconsistent with being an egoist. It merely happens that on some occasions the point of view of justice and that of his own interests lead to the same course of action. Therefore I am not trying to show that in a well-ordered society an egoist would act from a sense of justice, nor even that he would act justly because so acting would best advance his ends. Nor, again, are we to argue that an egoist, finding himself in a just society, would be well advised, given his aims, to transform himself into a just man. Rather, we are concerned with the goodness of the settled desire to take up the standpoint of justice. I assume that the members of a well-ordered society already have this desire. The question is whether this regulative sentiment is consistent with their good. We are not examining the justice or the moral worth of actions from certain points of view; we are assessing the goodness of the desire to adopt a particular point of view, that of justice itself. And we must evaluate this desire not from the egoist's standpoint, whatever this might be, but in the light of the thin theory of the good.

I shall assume that human actions spring from existing desires and that these can be changed only gradually. We cannot just decide at a given moment to alter our system of ends (§63). We act now as the sort of person we are and from the wants we have now, and not as the sort of person we might have been or from desires we would have had if earlier we had only chosen differently. Regulative aims are especially subject to this constraint. Thus we must decide well in advance whether to affirm our sense of justice by trying to assess our situation over a fairly extensive future. We cannot have things both ways. We cannot preserve a sense of justice and all that this implies while at the same time holding ourselves ready to act unjustly should doing so promise some personal advantage. A just person is not prepared to do certain things, and if he is tempted too easily, he was prepared after all.30 Our question concerns then only those with a certain psychology and system of desires. It would obviously be demanding too much to require that stability should not depend upon definite restrictions in this respect.

Now on one interpretation the question has an obvious answer. Supposing that someone has an effective sense of justice, he will then have a regulative desire to comply with the corresponding principles. The criteria of rational choice must take this desire into account. If a person wants with deliberative rationality to act from the standpoint of justice above all else, it is rational for him so to act. Therefore in this form the question is trivial: being the sorts of persons they are, the members of a well-ordered society desire more than anything to act justly and fulfilling this desire is part of their good. Once we acquire a sense of justice that is truly final and effective, as the precedence of justice requires, we are confirmed in a plan of life that, insofar as we are rational, leads us to preserve and to

<sup>30.</sup> See Philippa Foot, "Moral Beliefs," *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,* vol. 59 (1958– 1959), p. 104. I am much indebted to this essay, although I have not followed it on all counts.

encourage this sentiment. Since this fact is public knowledge, instability of the first kind does not exist, and hence neither does that of the second. The real problem of congruence is what happens if we imagine someone to give weight to his sense of justice only to the extent that it satisfies other descriptions which connect it with reasons specified by the thin theory of the good. We should not rely on the doctrine of the pure conscientious act (§72). Suppose, then, that the desire to act justly is not a final desire like that to avoid pain, misery, or apathy, or the desire to fulfill the inclusive interest. The theory of justice supplies other descriptions of what the sense of justice is a desire for; and we must use these to show that a person following the thin theory of the good would indeed confirm this sentiment as regulative of his plan of life.

So much then for defining the question. I now wish to note the grounds of congruence by reviewing various points already made. First of all, as the contract doctrine requires, the principles of justice are public: they characterize the commonly recognized moral convictions shared by the members of a well-ordered society (§23). We are not concerned with someone who is questioning these principles. By hypothesis, he concedes as everyone else does that they are the best choice from the standpoint of the original position. (Of course, this can always be doubted but it raises an entirely different matter.) Now since others are assumed to have (and to continue to have) an effective sense of justice, our hypothetical individual is considering in effect a policy of pretending to have certain moral sentiments, all the while being ready to act as a free-rider whenever the opportunity arises to further his personal interests. Since the conception of justice is public, he is debating whether to set out on a systematic course of deception and hypocrisy, professing without belief, as it suits his purpose, the accepted moral views. That deception and hypocrisy are wrongs does not, I assume, bother him; but he will have to reckon with the psychological cost of taking precautions and maintaining his pose, and with the loss of spontaneity and naturalness that results.31 In most societies as things are, such pretensions may not have a high price, since the injustice of institutions and the often squalid behavior of others renders one's own deceits easier to endure; but in a well-ordered society there is not this comfort.

These remarks are supported by the fact that there is a connection between acting justly and natural attitudes (§74). Given the content of the principles of justice and the laws of moral psychology, wanting to be fair

<sup>31.</sup> See Foot, ibid., p. 104.

with our friends and wanting to give justice to those we care for is as much a part of these affections as the desire to be with them and to feel sad at their loss. Assuming therefore that one needs these attachments, the policy contemplated is presumably that of acting justly only toward those to whom we are bound by ties of affection and fellow feeling, and of respecting ways of life to which we are devoted. But in a well-ordered society these bonds extend rather widely, and include ties to institutional forms, assuming here that all three psychological laws are fully effective. In addition, we cannot in general select who is to be injured by our unfairness. For example, if we cheat on paying our taxes, or if we find some way to avoid doing our fair share for the community, everyone is hurt, our friends and associates along with the rest. To be sure, we might consider covertly passing on part of our gains to those we especially like, but this becomes a dubious and involved affair. Thus in a well-ordered society where effective bonds are extensive both to persons and to social forms, and we cannot select who is to lose by our defections, there are strong grounds for preserving one's sense of justice. Doing this protects in a natural and simple way the institutions and persons we care for and leads us to welcome new and broader social ties.

Another basic consideration is this: it follows from the Aristotelian Principle (and its companion effect) that participating in the life of a well-ordered society is a great good (§79). This conclusion depends upon the meaning of the principles of justice and their precedence in everyone's plans as well as upon the psychological features of our nature. It is the details of the contract view which establish this connection. Because such a society is a social union of social unions, it realizes to a preeminent degree the various forms of human activity; and given the social nature of humankind, the fact that our potentialities and inclinations far surpass what can be expressed in any one life, we depend upon the cooperative endeavors of others not only for the means of well-being but to bring to fruition our latent powers. And with a certain success all around, each enjoys the greater richness and diversity of the collective activity. Yet to share fully in this life we must acknowledge the principles of its regulative conception, and this means that we must affirm our sentiment of justice. To appreciate something as ours, we must have a certain allegiance to it. What binds a society's efforts into one social union is the mutual recognition and acceptance of the principles of justice; it is this general affirmation which extends the ties of identification over the whole community and permits the Aristotelian Principle to have its wider effect. Individual and group accomplishments are no longer seen as just so many separate personal goods. Whereas not to confirm our sense of justice is to limit ourselves to a narrow view.

Finally, there is the reason connected with the Kantian interpretation: acting justly is something we want to do as free and equal rational beings (§40). The desire to act justly and the desire to express our nature as free moral persons turn out to specify what is practically speaking the same desire. When someone has true beliefs and a correct understanding of the theory of justice, these two desires move him in the same way. They are both dispositions to act from precisely the same principles: namely, those that would be chosen in the original position. Of course, this contention is based on a theory of justice. If this theory is unsound, the practical identity fails. But since we are concerned only with the special case of a well-ordered society as characterized by the theory, we are entitled to assume that its members have a lucid grasp of the public conception of justice upon which their relations are founded.

Let us suppose that these are the chief reasons (or typical thereof) which the thin account of the good allows for maintaining one's sense of justice. The question now arises whether they are decisive. Here we confront the familiar difficulty of a balance of motives which in many ways is similar to a balance of first principles. Sometimes the answer is found by comparing one balance of reasons with another, for surely if the first balance clearly favors one course of action then the second will also, should its reasons supporting this alternative be stronger and its reasons supporting the other alternatives be weaker. But arguing from such comparisons presupposes some configurations of reasons which evidently go one way rather than another to serve as a bench mark. Failing these, we cannot get beyond conditional comparisons: if the first balance favors a certain choice, then the second does also.

Now at this point it is obvious that the content of the principles of justice is a crucial element in the decision. Whether it is for a person's good that he have a regulative sense of justice depends upon what justice requires of him. The congruence of the right and the good is determined by the standards by which each concept is specified. As Sidgwick notes, utilitarianism is more strict than common sense in demanding the sacrifice of the agent's private interests when this is necessary for the greater happiness of all.32 It is also more exacting than the contract theory, for while beneficent acts going beyond our natural duties are good actions and evoke our esteem, they are not required as a matter of right. Utilitari-

<sup>32.</sup> *Methods of Ethics,* pp. 246–253, 499.

anism may seem to be a more exalted ideal, but the other side of it is that it may authorize the lesser welfare and liberty of some for the sake of a greater happiness of others who may already be more fortunate. A rational person, in framing his plan, would hesitate to give precedence to so stringent a principle. It is likely both to exceed his capacity for sympathy and to be hazardous to his freedom. Thus however improbable the congruence of the right and the good in justice as fairness, it is surely more probable than on the utilitarian view. The conditional balance of reasons favors the contract doctrine.

A somewhat different point is suggested by the following doubt: namely, that while the decision to preserve our sentiment of justice might be rational, we may in the end suffer a very great loss or even be ruined by it. As we have seen, a just person is not prepared to do certain things, and so in the face of evil circumstances he may decide to chance death rather than to act unjustly. Yet although it is true enough that for the sake of justice a man may lose his life where another would live to a later day, the just man does what all things considered he most wants; in this sense he is not defeated by ill fortune the possibility of which he foresaw. The question is on a par with the hazards of love; indeed, it is simply a special case. Those who love one another, or who acquire strong attachments to persons and to forms of life, at the same time become liable to ruin: their love makes them hostages to misfortune and the injustice of others. Friends and lovers take great chances to help each other; and members of families willingly do the same. Their being so disposed belongs to their attachments as much as any other inclination. Once we love we are vulnerable: there is no such thing as loving while being ready to consider whether to love, just like that. And the loves that may hurt the least are not the best loves. When we love we accept the dangers of injury and loss. In view of our general knowledge of the likely course of life, we do not think these risks so great as to cause us to cease loving. Should evils occur, they are the object of our aversion, and we resist those whose machinations bring them about. If we are loving we do not regret our love. Now if these things are true of love as the world is, or very often is, then a fortiori they would appear to be true of loves in a well-ordered society, and so of the sense of justice too. For in a society where others are just our loves expose us mainly to the accidents of nature and the contingency of circumstances. And similarly for the sentiment of justice which is connected to these affections. Taking as a bench mark the balance of reasons that leads us to affirm our loves as things are, it seems that we should be ready once we come of age to maintain our sense of justice in the more favorable conditions of a just society.

One special feature of the desire to express our nature as moral persons strengthens this conclusion. With other inclinations of the self, there is a choice of degree and scope. Our policy of deception and hypocrisy need not be completely systematic; our affective ties to institutions and to other persons can be more or less strong, and our participation in the wider life of society more or less full. There is a continuum of possibilities and not an all or nothing decision, although for simplicity I have spoken pretty much in these terms. But the desire to express our nature as a free and equal rational being can be fulfilled only by acting on the principles of right and justice as having first priority. This is a consequence of the condition of finality: since these principles are regulative, the desire to act upon them is satisfied only to the extent that it is likewise regulative with respect to other desires. It is acting from this precedence that expresses our freedom from contingency and happenstance. Therefore in order to realize our nature we have no alternative but to plan to preserve our sense of justice as governing our other aims. This sentiment cannot be fulfilled if it is compromised and balanced against other ends as but one desire among the rest. It is a desire to conduct oneself in a certain way above all else, a striving that contains within itself its own priority. Other aims can be achieved by a plan that allows a place for each, since their satisfaction is possible independent of their place in the ordering. But this is not the case with the sense of right and justice; and therefore acting wrongly is always liable to arouse feelings of guilt and shame, the emotions aroused by the defeat of our regulative moral sentiments. Of course, this does not mean that the realization of our nature as a free and rational being is itself an all or nothing affair. To the contrary, how far we succeed in expressing our nature depends upon how consistently we act from our sense of justice as finally regulative. What we cannot do is express our nature by following a plan that views the sense of justice as but one desire to be weighed against others. For this sentiment reveals what the person is, and to compromise it is not to achieve for the self free reign but to give way to the contingencies and accidents of the world.

One last question must be mentioned. Suppose that even in a well-ordered society there are some persons for whom the affirmation of their sense of justice is not a good. Given their aims and wants and the peculiarities of their nature, the thin account of the good does not define reasons sufficient for them to maintain this regulative sentiment. It has been argued that to these persons one cannot truthfully recommend justice as a virtue.33 And this is surely correct, assuming such a recommendation to imply that rational grounds (identified by the thin theory) counsel this course for them as individuals. But then the further question remains whether those who do affirm their sense of justice are treating these persons unjustly in requiring them to comply with just institutions.

Now unhappily we are not yet in a position to answer this query properly, since it presupposes a theory of punishment and I have said very little about this part of the theory of justice (§39). I have assumed strict compliance with any conception that would be chosen and then considered which one on the list presented would be adopted. However, we may reason much as we did in the case of civil disobedience, another part of partial compliance theory. Thus granting that adherence to whatever conception is acknowledged will be imperfect if left completely voluntary, under what conditions would the persons in the original position agree that stabilizing penal devices can be employed? Would they insist that a person can be required to do only what is to his advantage as defined by the thin theory?

It seems clear, in the light of the contract doctrine as a whole, that they would not. For this restriction amounts in effect to general egoism which, as we have seen, would be rejected. Moreover, the principles of right and justice are collectively rational; and it is in the interest of each that everyone else should comply with just arrangements. It is also the case that the general affirmation of the sense of justice is a great social asset, establishing the basis for mutual trust and confidence from which all normally benefit. Thus in agreeing to penalties that stabilize a scheme of cooperation the parties accept the same kind of constraint on self-interest that they acknowledge in choosing the principles of justice in the first place. Having agreed to these principles in view of the reasons already surveyed, it is rational to authorize the measures needed to maintain just institutions, assuming that the constraints of equal liberty and the rule of law are duly recognized (§§38–39). Those who find that being disposed to act justly is not a good for them cannot deny these contentions. It is, of course, true that in their case just arrangements do not fully answer to their nature, and therefore, other things equal, they will be less happy than they would be if they could affirm their sense of justice. But here one can only say: their nature is their misfortune.

The main point then is that to justify a conception of justice we do not

<sup>33.</sup> See Foot, pp. 99–104.

have to contend that everyone, whatever his capacities and desires, has a sufficient reason (as defined by the thin theory) to preserve his sense of justice. For our good depends upon the sorts of persons we are, the kinds of wants and aspirations we have and are capable of. It can even happen that there are many who do not find a sense of justice for their good; but if so, the forces making for stability are weaker. Under such conditions penal devices will play a much larger role in the social system. The greater the lack of congruence, the greater the likelihood, other things equal, of instability with its attendant evils. Yet none of this nullifies the collective rationality of the principles of justice; it is still to the advantage of each that everyone else should honor them. At least this holds true so long as the conception of justice is not so unstable that some other conception would be preferable. But what I have tried to show is that the contract doctrine is superior to its rivals on this score, and therefore that the choice of principles in the original position need not be reconsidered. In fact, granted a reasonable interpretation of human sociability (provided by the account of how a sense of justice is acquired and by the idea of social union), justice as fairness appears to be a sufficiently stable conception. The hazards of the generalized prisoner's dilemma are removed by the match between the right and the good. Of course, under normal conditions public knowledge and confidence are always imperfect. So even in a just society it is reasonable to admit certain constraining arrangements to insure compliance, but their main purpose is to underwrite citizens' trust in one another. These mechanisms will seldom be invoked and will comprise but a minor part of the social scheme.

We are now at the end of this rather lengthy discussion of the stability of justice as fairness. The only further point to note is that congruence allows us to complete the sequence of applications of the definition of goodness. We can say first that, in a well-ordered society, being a good person (and in particular having an effective sense of justice) is indeed a good for that person; and second that this form of society is a good society. The first assertion follows from congruence; the second holds since a well-ordered society has the properties that it is rational to want in a society from the two relevant points of view. Thus a well-ordered society satisfies the principles of justice which are collectively rational from the perspective of the original position; and from the standpoint of the individual, the desire to affirm the public conception of justice as regulative of one's plan of life accords with the principles of rational choice. These conclusions support the values of community, and in reaching them my account of justice as fairness is completed.

#### 87. CONCLUDING REMARKS ON JUSTIFICATION

I shall not try to summarize the presentation of the theory of justice. Instead I should like to end with a few comments about the kind of argument I have offered for it. Now that the whole conception is before us, we are in a position to note in a general way the sorts of things that can be said on its behalf. Doing this will clarify several points which may still be in doubt.

Philosophers commonly try to justify ethical theories in one of two ways. Sometimes they attempt to find self-evident principles from which a sufficient body of standards and precepts can be derived to account for our considered judgments. A justification of this kind we may think of as Cartesian. It presumes that first principles can be seen to be true, even necessarily so; deductive reasoning then transfers this conviction from premises to conclusion. A second approach (called naturalism by an abuse of language) is to introduce definitions of moral concepts in terms of presumptively non-moral ones, and then to show by accepted procedures of common sense and the sciences that the statements thus paired with the asserted moral judgments are true. Although on this view the first principles of ethics are not self-evident, the justification of moral convictions poses no special difficulties. They can be established, granting the definitions, in the same fashion as other statements about the world.

I have not adopted either of these conceptions of justification. For while some moral principles may seem natural and even obvious, there are great obstacles to maintaining that they are necessarily true, or even to explaining what is meant by this. Indeed, I have held that these principles are contingent in the sense that they are chosen in the original position in the light of general facts (§26). More likely candidates for necessary moral truths are the conditions imposed on the adoption of principles; but actually it seems best to regard these conditions simply as reasonable stipulations to be assessed eventually by the whole theory to which they belong. There is no set of conditions or first principles that can be plausibly claimed to be necessary or definitive of morality and thereby especially suited to carry the burden of justification. On the other hand, the method of naturalism so-called must first distinguish moral from nonmoral concepts and then gain acceptance for the definitions laid down. For the justification to succeed, a clear theory of meaning is presupposed and this seems to be lacking. And in any case, definitions become the main part of the ethical doctrine, and thus in turn they need to be justified.

Therefore we do better, I think, to regard a moral theory just as any

other theory, making due allowances for its Socratic aspects (§9). There is no reason to suppose that its first principles or assumptions need to be self-evident, or that its concepts and criteria can be replaced by other notions which can be certified as non-moral.34 Thus while I have maintained, for example, that something's being right, or just, can be understood as its being in accordance with the relevant principles that would be acknowledged in the original position, and that we can in this way replace the former notions by the latter, these definitions are set up within the theory itself (§18). I do not hold that the conception of the original position is itself without moral force, or that the family of concepts it draws upon is ethically neutral (§23). This question I simply leave aside. I have not proceeded then as if first principles, or conditions thereon, or definitions either, have special features that permit them a peculiar place in justifying a moral doctrine. They are central elements and devices of theory, but justification rests upon the entire conception and how it fits in with and organizes our considered judgments in reflective equilibrium. As we have noted before, justification is a matter of the mutual support of many considerations, of everything fitting together into one coherent view (§4). Accepting this idea allows us to leave questions of meaning and definition aside and to get on with the task of developing a substantive theory of justice.

The three parts of the exposition of this theory are intended to make a unified whole by supporting one another in roughly the following way. The first part presents the essentials of the theoretical structure, and the principles of justice are argued for on the basis of reasonable stipulations concerning the choice of such conceptions. I urged the naturalness of these conditions and presented reasons why they are accepted, but it was not claimed that they are self-evident, or required by the analysis of moral concepts or the meaning of ethical terms. In the second part I examined the sorts of institutions that justice enjoins and the kinds of duties and obligations it imposes on individuals. The aim throughout was to show that the theory proposed matches the fixed points of our considered convictions better than other familiar doctrines, and that it leads us to revise and extrapolate our judgments in what seem on reflection to be more satisfactory ways. First principles and particular judgments appear on

34. The view proposed here accords with the account in §9 which follows "Outline for Ethics" (1951). But it has benefited from the conception of justification found in W. V. Quine, *Word and Object* (Cambridge, M.I.T. Press, 1960), ch. 1 and elsewhere. See also his *Ontological Relativity and Other Essays* (New York, Columbia University Press, 1969), Essay 4. For a development of this conception to include explicitly moral thought and judgment, see Morton White, *Toward Reunion in Philosophy* (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1956), pt. III, esp. pp. 254–258, 263, 266f.

balance to hang together reasonably well, at least in comparison with alternative theories. Finally we checked to see in the third part if justice as fairness is a feasible conception. This forced us to raise the question of stability and whether the right and the good as defined are congruent. These considerations do not determine the initial acknowledgment of principles in the first part of the argument, but confirm it (§81). They show that our nature is such as to allow the original choice to be carried through. In this sense we might say that humankind has a moral nature.

Now some may hold that this kind of justification faces two sorts of difficulties. First, it is open to the general complaint that it appeals to the mere fact of agreement. Second, there is the more specific objection to the argument I have presented that it depends upon a particular list of conceptions of justice between which the parties in the original position are to choose, and it assumes not only an agreement among persons in their considered judgments, but also in what they regard as reasonable conditions to impose on the choice of first principles. It may be said that the agreement in considered convictions is constantly changing and varies between one society, or part thereof, and another. Some of the so-called fixed points may not really be fixed, nor will everyone accept the same principles for filling in the gaps in their existing judgments. And any list of conceptions of justice, or consensus about what counts as reasonable conditions on principles, is surely more or less arbitrary. The case presented for justice as fairness, so the contention runs, does not escape these limitations.

In regard to the general objection the reply is that justification is argument addressed to those who disagree with us, or to ourselves when we are of two minds. It presumes a clash of views between persons or within one person, and seeks to convince others, or ourselves, of the reasonableness of the principles upon which our claims and judgments are founded. Being designed to reconcile by reason, justification proceeds from what all parties to the discussion hold in common. Ideally, to justify a conception of justice to someone is to give him a proof of its principles from premises that we both accept, these principles having in turn consequences that match our considered judgments. Thus mere proof is not justification. A proof simply displays logical relations between propositions. But proofs become justification once the starting points are mutually recognized, or the conclusions so comprehensive and compelling as to persuade us of the soundness of the conception expressed by their premises.

It is perfectly proper, then, that the argument for the principles of jus-

tice should proceed from some consensus. This is the nature of justification. Yet the more specific objections are correct in implying that the force of the argument depends on the features of the consensus appealed to. Here several points deserve notice. To begin with, while it should be granted that any list of alternatives may be to some extent arbitrary, the objection is mistaken if it is read as holding that all lists are equally so. A list that includes the leading traditional theories is less arbitrary than one which leaves out the more obvious candidates. Certainly the argument for the principles of justice would be strengthened by showing that they are still the best choice from a more comprehensive list more systematically evaluated. I do not know how far this can be done. I doubt, however, that the principles of justice (as I have defined them) will be the preferred conception on anything resembling a complete list. (Here I assume that, given an upper bound on complexity and other constraints, the class of reasonable and practicable alternatives is effectively finite.) Even if the argument I have offered is sound, it only shows that a finally adequate theory (if such exists) will look more like the contract view than any of the other doctrines we discussed. And even this conclusion is not proved in any strict sense.

Nevertheless, in comparing justice as fairness with these conceptions, the list used is not simply ad hoc: it includes representative theories from the tradition of moral philosophy which comprises the historical consensus about what so far seem to be the more reasonable and practicable moral conceptions. With time further possibilities will be worked out, thereby providing a more convincing basis for justification as the leading conception is subjected to a more severe test. But these things we can only anticipate. For the present it is appropriate to try to reformulate the contract doctrine and to compare it with a few familiar alternatives. This procedure is not arbitrary; we can advance in no other way.

Turning to the particular difficulty about the consensus on reasonable conditions, one should point out that one of the aims of moral philosophy is to look for possible bases of agreement where none seem to exist. It must attempt to extend the range of some existing consensus and to frame more discriminating moral conceptions for our consideration. Justifying grounds do not lie ready to hand: they need to be discovered and suitably expressed, sometimes by lucky guesses, sometimes by noting the requirements of theory. It is with this aim in mind that the various conditions on the choice of first principles are brought together in the notion of the original position. The idea is that by putting together enough reasonable constraints into a single conception, it will become obvious that one among the alternatives presented is to be preferred. We should like it to happen that the superiority of a particular view (among those currently known) is the result, perhaps the unexpected result, of this newly observed consensus.

Again, the set of conditions incorporated into the notion of the original position is not without an explanation. It is possible to maintain that these requirements are reasonable and to connect them with the purpose of moral principles and their role in establishing the ties of community. The grounds for ordering and finality, say, seem clear enough. And we can now see that publicity can be explained as insuring that the process of justification can be perfectly carried through (in the limit so to speak) without untoward effects. For publicity allows that all can justify their conduct to everyone else (when their conduct is justifiable) without selfdefeating or other disturbing consequences. If we take seriously the idea of a social union and of society as a social union of such unions, then surely publicity is a natural condition. It helps to establish that a well-ordered society is one activity in the sense that its members follow and know of one another, that they follow the same regulative conception; and everyone shares in the benefits of the endeavors of all in ways to which each is known to consent. Society is not partitioned with respect to the mutual recognition of its first principles. And, indeed, this must be so if the binding action of the conception of justice and of the Aristotelian principle (and its companion effect) are to take place.

To be sure, the function of moral principles is not uniquely defined; it admits of various interpretations. We might try to choose between them by seeing which one uses the weakest set of conditions to characterize the initial situation. The difficulty with this suggestion is that while weaker conditions are indeed to be preferred, other things equal, there is no weakest set; a minimum does not exist short of no conditions at all and this is of no interest. Therefore we must look for a constrained minimum, a set of weak conditions that still enables us to construct a workable theory of justice. Certain parts of justice as fairness should be viewed in this way. I have several times noted the minimal nature of the conditions on principles when taken singly. For example, the assumption of mutually disinterested motivation is not a demanding stipulation. Not only does it enable us to base the theory upon a reasonably precise notion of rational choice, but it asks little of the parties: in this way the principles chosen can adjust wider and deeper conflicts, an obvious desideratum (§40). It has the further advantage of separating off the more evident moral elements of the original position in the form of general conditions and the veil of ignorance and the like, so that we can see more clearly how justice requires us to go beyond a concern for our own interests.

The discussion of freedom of conscience illustrates most clearly the assumption of mutual disinterest. Here the opposition of the parties is very great, yet one can still show that if any agreement is possible, it is that on the principle of equal liberty. And, as we noted, this idea can be extended to conflicts between moral doctrines as well (§33). If the parties assume that in society they affirm some moral conception (the content of which is unknown to them), they can still assent to the first principle. This principle therefore appears to hold a special place among moral views; it defines an agreement in the limit once we postulate sufficiently wide disparities consistent with certain minimal conditions for a practical conception of justice.

I should now like to take note of several objections that are independent from the method of justification and concern instead certain features of the theory of justice itself. One of these is the criticism that the contract view is a narrowly individualistic doctrine. To this difficulty, the preceding remarks supply the answer. For once the point of the assumption of mutual disinterest is understood, the objection seems misplaced. Within the framework of justice as fairness we can reformulate and establish Kantian themes by using a suitably general conception of rational choice. For example, we have found interpretations of autonomy and of the moral law as an expression of our nature as free and equal rational beings; the categorical imperative also has its analogue, as does the idea of never treating persons as means only, or indeed as means at all. Further, in the last part the theory of justice has been shown to account for the values of community as well; and this strengthens the earlier contention that embedded in the principles of justice there is an ideal of the person that provides an Archimedean point for judging the basic structure of society (§41). These aspects of the theory of justice are developed slowly beginning from what looks like an unduly rationalistic conception that makes no provision for social values. The original position is first used to determine the content of justice, the principles which define it. Not until later is justice seen as part of our good and connected with our natural sociability. The merits of the idea of the original position cannot be assessed by focusing on some single feature of it, but, as I have often observed, only by the whole theory which is built upon it.

If justice as fairness is more convincing than the older presentations of the contract doctrine, I believe that it is because the original position, as indicated above, unites in one conception a reasonably clear problem of choice with conditions that are widely recognized as fitting to impose on the adoption of moral principles. This initial situation combines the requisite clarity with the relevant ethical constraints. It is partly to preserve this clarity that I have avoided attributing to the parties any ethical motivation. They decide solely on the basis of what seems best calculated to further their interests so far as they can ascertain them. In this way we can exploit the intuitive idea of rational prudential choice. We can, however, define ethical variations of the initial situation by supposing the parties to be influenced by moral considerations. It is a mistake to object that the notion of the original agreement would no longer be ethically neutral. For this notion already includes moral features and must do so, for example, the formal conditions on principles and the veil of ignorance. I have simply divided up the description of the original position so that these elements do not occur in the characterization of the parties, although even here there might be a question as to what counts as a moral element and what does not. There is no need to settle this problem. What is important is that the various features of the original position should be expressed in the simplest and most compelling way.

Occasionally I have touched upon some possible ethical variations of the initial situation (§17). For example, one might assume that the parties hold the principle that no one should be advantaged by unmerited assets and contingencies, and therefore they choose a conception of justice that mitigates the effects of natural accident and social fortune. Or else they may be said to accept a principle of reciprocity requiring that distributive arrangements always lie on the upward sloping portion of the contribution curve. Again, some notion of fair and willing cooperation may limit the conceptions of justice which the parties are prepared to entertain. There is no a priori reason for thinking that these variations must be less convincing, or the moral constraints they express less widely shared. Moreover, we have seen that the possibilities just mentioned appear to confirm the difference principle, lending further support to it. Although I have not proposed a view of this kind, they certainly deserve further examination. The crucial thing is not to use principles that are contested. Thus to reject the principle of average utility by imposing a rule against taking chances in the original position would render the method fruitless, since some philosophers have sought to justify this principle by deriving it as the consequence of the appropriate impersonal attitude in certain risk situations. We must find other arguments against the utility criterion: the propriety of taking chances is among the things in dispute (§28). The idea of the initial agreement can only succeed if its conditions are in fact widely recognized, or can become so.

Another fault, some may contend, is that the principles of justice are not derived from the notion of respect for persons, from a recognition of their inherent worth and dignity. Since the original position (as I have defined it) does not include this idea, not explicitly anyway, the argument for justice as fairness may be thought unsound. I believe, however, that while the principles of justice will be effective only if men have a sense of justice and do therefore respect one another, the notion of respect or of the inherent worth of persons is not a suitable basis for arriving at these principles. It is precisely these ideas that call for interpretation. The situation is analogous to that of benevolence: without the principles of right and justice, the aims of benevolence and the requirements of respect are both undefined; they presuppose these principles already independently derived (§30). Once the conception of justice is on hand, however, the ideas of respect and of human dignity can be given a more definite meaning. Among other things, respect for persons is shown by treating them in ways that they can see to be justified. But more than this, it is manifest in the content of the principles to which we appeal. Thus to respect persons is to recognize that they possess an inviolability founded on justice that even the welfare of society as a whole cannot override. It is to affirm that the loss of freedom for some is not made right by a greater welfare enjoyed by others. The lexical priorities of justice represent the value of persons that Kant says is beyond all price.35 The theory of justice provides a rendering of these ideas but we cannot start out from them. There is no way to avoid the complications of the original position, or of some similar construction, if our notions of respect and the natural basis of equality are to be systematically presented.

These remarks bring us back to the common sense conviction, which we noted at the outset, that justice is the first virtue of social institutions (§1). I have tried to set forth a theory that enables us to understand and to assess these feelings about the primacy of justice. Justice as fairness is the outcome: it articulates these opinions and supports their general tendency. And while, of course, it is not a fully satisfactory theory, it offers, I believe, an alternative to the utilitarian view which has for so long held the preeminent place in our moral philosophy. I have tried to present the

<sup>35.</sup> See *The Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals,* pp. 434–436, vol. IV of the Academy Edition.

theory of justice as a viable systematic doctrine so that the idea of maximizing the good does not hold sway by default. The criticism of teleological theories cannot fruitfully proceed piecemeal. We must attempt to construct another kind of view which has the same virtues of clarity and system but which yields a more discriminating interpretation of our moral sensibilities.

Finally, we may remind ourselves that the hypothetical nature of the original position invites the question: why should we take any interest in it, moral or otherwise? Recall the answer: the conditions embodied in the description of this situation are ones that we do in fact accept. Or if we do not, then we can be persuaded to do so by philosophical considerations of the sort occasionally introduced. Each aspect of the original position can be given a supporting explanation. Thus what we are doing is to combine into one conception the totality of conditions that we are ready upon due reflection to recognize as reasonable in our conduct with regard to one another (§4). Once we grasp this conception, we can at any time look at the social world from the required point of view. It suffices to reason in certain ways and to follow the conclusions reached. This standpoint is also objective and expresses our autonomy (§78). Without conflating all persons into one but recognizing them as distinct and separate, it enables us to be impartial, even between persons who are not contemporaries but who belong to many generations. Thus to see our place in society from the perspective of this position is to see it *sub specie aeternitatis:* it is to regard the human situation not only from all social but also from all temporal points of view. The perspective of eternity is not a perspective from a certain place beyond the world, nor the point of view of a transcendent being; rather it is a certain form of thought and feeling that rational persons can adopt within the world. And having done so, they can, whatever their generation, bring together into one scheme all individual perspectives and arrive together at regulative principles that can be affirmed by everyone as he lives by them, each from his own standpoint. Purity of heart, if one could attain it, would be to see clearly and to act with grace and self-command from this point of view.
